# $Id$

Scat is closely related to semtex/dns, but adds a new scalar variable,
'c'. This has to appear in the list of fields, in the boundary
conditions etc, just as for the velocities and pressure.  The ordering
of fields in the FIELDS section is significant: u, v, c, p for
2-velocity-component and u, v, w, c, p for 3-velocity-component flows.
However, the ordering of these variables in .fld, .rst, and .avg files
is not significant (so the order these variables could occur in the
USER section could be arbitrary - but it's probably least confusing to
retain the same ordering).

When restarting (e.g. from session.rst), fields that are not present
in the restart file are set to zero (this is standard semtex
practise). This allows restart from previous solutions that just
contain velocity data.

The supplied makefile assumes that the scat directory resides at the
same level as the semtex directory (not within it). This is easy to
alter if desired (edit makefile).

The diffusivity of the scalar (say, alpha) is defined in relation to
the kinematic viscosity by the PRANDTL token: alpha = KINVIS/PRANDTL.
So PRANDTL should be defined in the TOKENS section. Its default value
is 0.72, the diffusivity of heat/temperature in air.

BUOYANCY
--------

The code allows Boussinesq buoyancy.  For this, the
concentration-dependent coefficient of expansion, BETA_T, must also be
defined, as well as GRAVITY (magnitude) and its direction (specified
by components g_1, g_2, g_3 -- these vector components are re-scaled
within the code to provide a unit vector).  For a cylindrical
coordinate system, the gravity vector has to point along the
cylindrical/x axis (this restriction could be removed in future).  If
g_i are all zero (the default) no buoyancy is applied.

EXAMPLES
--------

Three example session files for scat ("tdrivcav1", a thermally driven
cavity flow, "tdrivcav2", which essentially is a more highly resolved
version of the same thing, and "thouse", copied from the front of
Funaro's monograph) are provided in the semtex/mesh directory.

AVERAGING
---------

The AVERAGE token works as for dns, except that averages and
correlations are extended to include 'c' as well, and AVERAGE=3
(energy balance) is not supported.  A specialised version of the
rstress utility is included with the scat distribution. Naming scheme
for components of the symmetric "Reynolds stresses" tensor stored in
session .avg when AVERAGE=2:

                      / uu uv uc uw \     /  A  B  D  G \
                      | .  vv vc vw |  =  |  .  C  E  H |
                      | .  .  cc cw |     |  .  .  F  I |
                      \ .  .  .  ww /     \  .  .  .  J /

BCS
---

The robust outflow BC of Dong et al., implemented in Semtex V8, is an
option in scat.  Just include an extra specification for scalar, like
this: <O> c </O>.  Likewise, one can use axis BCs in scat, and the
treatment for scalr is similar: <A> c </A>.
