TITLE:        Comparison of two-dimensional and three-dimensional simulations
              of oscillatory flow around a circular cylinder

AUTHORS:      An, Cheng, Zhao

SUBMITTED TO: Computers and Fluids

REVIEW:       First

RECOMMENDATION

1. I do not think that the authors have put in enough work to compare
in detail the difference between outcomes of 2D and 3D simulations,
the stated aim of their research, across the range of KC and beta
values used. There are many images of three-dimensional flow fields
but little depth in the comparison of 2D and 3D flows and loadings.
(Their related paper 'Direct numerical simulation of oscillatory flow
around a circular cylinder at low Keuleganâ€“Carpenter number' which has
now appeared at the Journal of Fluid Mechanics website -
doi:10.1017/S0022112010003691 - carries detail about the nature of 3D
flow at low KC.) 

I recommend the present manuscript be withdrawn and substantially
revised to provide more depth regarding comparison of 2D and 3D flows
and loads, including studies of correlation lengths so that sectional
phase-averaged loadings can be used to estimate loads on a length of
structure. A really useful outcome that the authors could work towards
in considering a revision is some practical guidance as to where in
parameter space one might reasonably use 2D simulations for the
purposes of loading predictions, and why. The present manuscript seems
too much like a set of simulation results supplied without
interpretation sufficient to link them together -- the work reads more
like a conference paper than a journal article.

Other points:

2. As the authors point out one can use any two of the three
parameters KC, beta (Stokes number) and Re=KC*beta in order to
characterise cylinder motion.  Standard practice in this area is to
use KC and beta, and I suggest they stick to that. Somewhat
confusingly though, they have produced a set of simulations with
Re=2000 and varying KC. The reasoning behind this choice is not
explained, and it does tend to make a parametric comparison of their
result to past investigations rather difficult. I suggest a plot
showing KC and beta for the set of simulations with, if possible, flow
regimes e.g. as noted by Tatsuno & Bearman, Williamson, Sarpkaya, for
comparison.

3. Referencing and understanding of past work is rather patchy. It is
surprising that the asymptotic stability analysis of Hall (JFM 146,
1984) is not cited or discussed, since in fact this does a good job of
predicting the onset of regime B flows. The numerical stability
analysis of Elston et al (2006) does not show (as the present authors
can be taken to suggest) that 2D simulations are adequate at low beta
values; the primary instabilities there are 2D but are followed almost
immediately by 3D secondary ones: indeed all observed flows that break
symmetry are 3D for practical purposes.

4. There is no check of domain size, or that the spatio-temporal
resolution is adequate; DNS of even moderate-Re 3D flow around a
circular cylinder is quite demanding of resolution and I would have
expected that at least an elementary check of resolution be
supplied. The authors state that the radial mesh spacing at the
cylinder gives y+<1 yet we never see the detailed information
(e.g. based on peak wall shear stress) to support this claim.

5. Please provide some more discussion (e.g. placing these results in
the contect of previous works) why the results for KC=5 might have
substantially 3D flows.

