TITLE:        Direct Numerical Simulation of Flow in a Stenotic Channel
	      to Understand the Effect of Stenotic-Morphology on Turbulence

AUTHORS:      K Bhaganagar

SUBMITTED TO: Journal of Fluid Mechanics

REVIEW:	      First

This brief manuscript describes a DNS study of streamwise-periodic
turbulent flows in channels where the lower wall has four different
types of roughness morphology.  The Reynolds number is said to be 3000
based on the unblocked-channel half-height, but with an unstated
velocity scale. The amount of blockage is fixed at 25%. The mesh is
kept uniform and a first-order-time immersed boundary method is used
to deal with the roughness elements, which take up half the streamwise
length of the domain. The overall channel geometry is presented in
dimensional (e.g. 4mm x 4mm x 24mm) rather then non-dimensional
form. The results presented in figures 2-9 give spatio-temporally
averages profiles of mean and fluctuating velocity and vorticity
statistics (it is unclear why these results should be streamwise
averaged).  The remaining figures give snapshots of the flow on
sectional planes.

I'm afraid that my clear recommendation is that the manuscript should
be rejected. The motivation supplied for the work is vague and the
reasons for choosing the four roughness morphologies, degree of
stenosis, and overall proportions of the channel are not provided. If,
as stated, one motivation is to examine the effect on the effect of
various stenosis morphologies vascular flows, one would expect the
author to choose a tubular rather than channel geometry as the basis
of the study. It is not very surprising that the four different
morphologies of roughness element give somewhat different turbulence
statistics but no attempt is made to generalize the results, or to
relate them to some theory or experiments - the treatment given is
almost purely descriptive.




