TITLE:        Effect of base flow variation on non-modal stability

AUTHORS:      Brandt, Pralits, Sipp, Marquet

SUBMITTED TO: J Fluid Mech

REVIEW:       First

SUBJECT MATERIAL



RECOMMENDATION

The manuscript is important, topical and well written.  I enjoyed
reading and learning from it.  While it deals mostly with sensitivity
w.r.t. maximum gain of harmonic disturbances in boundary layer flows,
the methodology is clearly more general, and novel.  I strongly
recommend the work be accepted for publication in JFM.

I would like the following minor points of clarification and
correction addressed as the authors see fit, but do not need to
examine the manuscript again.

POINTS

1. sp: "delt" --> "dealt".

2. At the end of section 2.2, suggest authors point out that f_i is a
right singular vector of R. (Question: what would the corresponding
left singular vector correspond to physically?)

3. Around (2.11), as orientation very briefly outline mathematical
motivation for splitting the eigenproblem.

4. Do the curly braces used to group variables following (2.11)
(e.g. {f+,q+,a+}) have significance as an operator - do they define an
ordered set? I ask this because of the use of the relationship
"{q+,a+,f+} = {a,q,f}": what exactly does this mean?  Previously, in
the definition of the Lagrangian, we see "{\sigma,f,q,a}". Is that
something different?

5. Suggest "= \delta\sigma^2 = " be inserted in (2.12).

6. Related: just below (2.14) the authors refer to "Eq. (2.13)". Do
they mean (2.12)?

7. Last para, page 6. Surely "f=Ru" should be "u=Rf".

8. Very last sentence of section 2.3: "effect insensitive" --> "effect
becomes insensitive".

9. Also with regard to section 2.3, I suggest that the authors
consider supplying as an appendix the derivation which is "not
detailed here", or supplying a reference to a related derivation.

10. First sentence, page 8: delete "do"; "not anymore" --> "no
longer". 2nd sentence: "structurally overlap" --> "overlap
structurally".  "Sensitivity": of what, and to what?  I didn't
understand the logic of the last sentence of this paragraph: why
"Hence"? Please provide a little more explanation.

11. Section 2.4. Essentially this (and/or closely related) methodology
has been published and exploited in papers already referenced by the
authors, so I suggest they also add those references to this section
in order that the linkage between the present Lagrangian-based
treatment and the previous ones can be more readily appreciated.

12. In figures 1(a,b) consider adding labels to some of the contour
lines for those of us still using B/W printers.

13. Section 3.1: "decide" -- > "decided"; "to be able to" --> "in
order to"; "conclusion" --> "conclusions"; "one wish" --> "one
wishes".

14. Figure 2 caption: "cross-stream velocity" --> "wall-normal
velocity". In (b), I was unable to distinguish the dashed and
dash-dotted lines: perhaps an inset or another subfigure could be
used? Plus, it is confusing to also use a dash-dotted line in (c) to
indicate the critical layer.

15. Why is there a subheading 3.1 entitled "Parallel boundary layers"?
I suggest this subhead could be dropped and section 3 be renamed so
that it just deals with the parallel flow assumption, with a subheading
of "Sensitivity to base flow modifications" between paras 1 and 2 of
page 10, and then another section (4) begin in place of subsection
3.4, "Global analysis", which deals with a nonparallel BL.  Overall,
the present single results section is rather dense and could benefit
the reader through more careful use of subheadings and explanation of
the observed behaviour.  

16. page 12, line 3: "indicates result" --> "indicates the result".

17. I found the discussion related to figure 5 hard to follow -- I
suggest that a little more guidance is needed than is provided by the
statement "... one can notice that the base flow modifications
...". Perhaps it would help to briefly state the (obvious?) point that
the unmodified values of sigma^2 are obtained when Delta U_m=0
(e.g. draw in thin solid vertical lines at Delta U_m=0 in 5a and 5b
and explain their significance).

18. Page 17 "Schlichiting" --> ...
