TITLE:        Receptivity of the circular cylinder's first instability

AUTHORS:      F Gianetti and P Luchini

SUBMITTED TO: Journal of Fluid Mechanics

REVIEW:	      First

SUBJECT MATERIAL
----------------

This is a numerical study of the primary instability of the circular
cylinder wake, concentrating at Re=50, just above the Hopf bifurcation
that occurs at approximately Re=46 (Re=47, according to the
experiments of Provansal et al., JFM 182, 1987; Re=45, according to
the numerical analysis of Jackson, also JFM 182, 1987). The authors
compute the left and right real eigenvectors of the problem, with
complex eigenvalues.

MAIN POINTS
-----------

1. There seems to be a fundemental problem with this work. The
eigenfunctions should surely occur in complex-conjugate pairs, like
the eigenvalues, in order to allow a travelling wave type instability
of the wake. (This is the approach taken in Jackson's work, for
example.) Yet as far as I can understand from the manuscript (and as
implied e.g. by eq. 3.10), the authors have real eigenfunctions, and
consequently these lack any spatially oscillatory structure. (On the
other hand the critical Reynolds number, Re=46, is very close to the
correct value.)

I feel this fundamental issue needs to be addressed before the
manuscript can be considered further. Of course, there may be a lack
in my understanding of "adjoint eigenfunctions", but this might
afflict other readers as well, so more detailed explanation would be
in order: if the eigenvalues are complex, why are not the
eigenvectors?

MINOR POINTS
------------

2. I found it peculiar that the previous numerical investigation by
Jackson receives scant mention, just once in the Introduction, as far
as I can see, and the single quoted comparison value for critical
Reynolds number obtained by numerical methods stems not from his paper
but a much more recent conference proceedings.


