TITLE:        Spin-up from rest in a cylinder of an 
              electrically-conducting fluid under a
              magnetic field.

AUTHORS:      C.H. Lee, T. Tagawa, H. Ozoe and J.M. Hyun

SUBMITTED TO: Journal of Fluids Engineering

REVIEW:	      First

SUBJECT MATERIAL
----------------

This as an axisymmetric numerical study of the spin-up of conducting
fluid in an axial magnetic field. This is a topic that would be
difficult to attack experimentally, so the use of a numerical approach
is welcome. I found this to be a well-written and interesting
manuscript, and I found the fact that reversing the sense of the
magnetic field has no effect on the results intriguing and well
explained. My recommendation is that the manuscript be accepted,
subject to the authors addressing a few points of detail.

MAIN POINTS
-----------

1. As this is a purely numerical study, the paper needs more detailed
treatment of numerical accuracy in order for the reader to be
convinced of the adequacy of the resolution. The time-accuracy of the
method is not mentioned. My suggestion is that the authors include
some tabulated results that demonstrate the temporal and spatial
convergence of one representative simulation, e.g. by employing
different grid sizes and time steps, demonstrating that 51x51 is
adequate in space and delta t=0.01 is adequate in time.

2. The simulations are axisymmetric, while in practice systems such as
these (with or without free surfaces) are subject to three-dimensional
rotating wave instabilities. The authors need to discuss this and at
least issue caveats to the reader. Here are a few relevant papers:

@Article{gbys01,
  author =  {A. Yu. Gelfgat and P. Z. Bar-Yoseph and A. Solan},
  title =   {Three-Dimensional Instability of Axisymmetric Flow
             in a Rotating Lid--Cylinder Enclosure},
  journal = JFM,
  year =    2001,
  volume =  438,
  pages =   {363--377}
}

@Article{hlm02,
  author =  {A. H. Hirsa and J. M. Lopez and R. Miraghie},
  title =   {Symmetry Breaking to a Rotating Wave in a Lid-Driven
             Cylinder with a Free Surface: {Experimental} Observation},
  journal = PoF,
  year =    2002,
  volume =  14,
  number =  6,
  pages =   {L29--L32}
}

MINOR POINTS
------------

3. In the first sentence of the abstract the authors say they studied
spin up in a cylinder of aspect ratio O(1). In fact the aspect ratio
used is exactly 1, and there is no discussion of how the effect of
aspect ratio might change the results. It would be better to state
that the aspect ratio studied was 1, and then give some discussion
relating to the possible effect of aspect ratio. For example, at
higher aspect ratios, one might expect axial vortex breakdowns to play
a role in the dynamics.

4. One of the the main motivations for the study is stated on page 6
to be application to "Czochralski crystal growth techniques".  While
there are (later) some references to other papers in that area, I
still have no idea what these techniques are. While the work has its
own intrinsic interest as a study of magneto-hydrodynamics, a sentence
of two of explanation would be useful here, and help the reader to
better understand the motivation.

5. In the title, there should be no hyphen after "electrically". The
word "an" prior to "electrically" is not required. I also suggest that
"under" be changed to "in an axial".

6. Section 3, "Results and discussion" could be split into "Results"
and "Discussion". A suitable place could be after the end of the first
paragraph on p.14.
