TITLE:        Numerical experiments on vortex shedding 
              from an oscillating cylinder.

AUTHORS:      F. L. Ponta & H. Aref

SUBMITTED TO: Journal of Fluid Mechanics

REVIEW:	      First


SUBJECT MATERIAL
----------------

This work addresses wake modes found in two-dimensional simulations of
flow past oscillating cylinders, predominantly at Re=392, with further
work at Re=140. Most of the findings and analysis are
concerned with the 'P+S' wake mode first reported by Griffin & Ramberg
in 1974 (but so-named in Williamson & Roshko 1988).

MAIN POINTS
-----------

I'm afraid that do not believe that sufficient new or high-quality
material is presented here to justify publication in JFM.

The material that concerns the possible shift with Re of extent of the
P+S regime on Williamson & Roshko's map, while of some interest, is
very highly speculative, and rests to large extent on the veracity of
that map, which is in any case a 2D projection (into A/D, lambda/D
space) of what must be a 3D (A/D, lambda/D, Re) phase diagram. At
Re=392, the wake flows in the physical case are surely 3D, not 2D, a
point the authors give no attention to at all. The non-appearance of
Williamson & Roshko's 2P regime here is more than likely associated
with the absence of 3D mixing effects, rather than discrepancies in
Reynolds number (see e.g. Blackburn, Govardhan & Williamson 2001).
The information on downstream merger of vortices in the far wake is
interesting but alone insufficient to justify publication.

About 8 of 25 pages are devoted to the numerical method and its
validation. This is far too large a number of pages, considering the
topic and the journal which the authors address. I suggest that in
such a study, we just want to know the basics of the method and that
it is (demonstrated to be) spatially and temporally converged. The
results here do not seem especially reliable, when one considers the
large variability in Strouhal number, even at quite moderate Reynolds
numbers (see figure 7), well below the upper limit of 392 used in this
study. A study of numerical convergence of the method, say at Re=392,
would be reassuring. (And the authors should probably have chosen the
more recent measurements of Williamson 1989 or Hammache and Gharib
1991 with which to compare their numerical results for St, rather than
those of Roshko 1954.)

Some of the results here on the existence of the P+S mode in 2D
simulations, seem to reproduce findings already published by Blackburn
& Henderson (1999, not referenced), in another study of 2D wake modes
of a cylinder in forced oscillation, where the 'A2' solution branch is
essentially for the P+S mode. Figures 9 and 10 here are predated by
figures 6 and 7 of Blackburn & Henderson (1996).

REFERENCES
----------

Blackburn & Henderson (1996), Exptl Thermal & Fluid Sci, V12N2.

Blackburn & Henderson (1999), J Fluid Mech, V385.

Blackburn, Govardhan & Williamson (2001), J Fluids & Struct V15N3/4.

Hammache & Gharib (1991), J Fluid Mech, V232.

Williamson (1999), J Fluid Mech, V206.
