TITLE:        On the influence of inlet velocity profile and secondary
	      flow on pulsatile flow in a model artery with stenosis

AUTHORS:      S Peterson and MW Plesniak

SUBMITTED TO: Journal of Fluid Mechanics

REVIEW:	      Second

I am much happier with the revised version but the revisions bring up
a few minor points I would like resolved before recommending
publication.

1. In table 1 (and elsewhere) I don't think that $u_c$ (used in the
definition of reduced velocity) was defined.  Also, the definition of
reduced velocity supplied does not readily convey the meaning that it
is the distance in diameters that the mean flow moves in a pulse
period. I suggest that a mean velocity $4Q_{avg}/\pi D^2$ be defined
and that this is then further used in defining mean Reynolds number
and reduced velocity.  If the authors wished they could also likewise
define minimum and maximum bulk velocities/Reynolds numbers.

2. In discussing the results of Sherwin & Blackburn, Blackburn &
Sherwin near the bottom of page 6 the authors should point out that
the Widnall-type modes were the dominant expected instability with
increasing Reynolds number at low reduced velocities, while at high
reduced velocities the vortex-tilting mode is expected to become
dominant. The reduced velocity in the present work is above the range
considered by Blackburn & Sherwin, leading to the possibility of
vortex-tilting instabilities arising, or at least that they would be
expected in preference to the Widnall type.

3. I was pleased that the authors supplied Fourier coefficients of
their waveform in table 2 but ask that they be given in dimensionless
form.  Likewise the circulation values in table 3.  A more minor
point: what are the ordinate scales on figure 27?


