TITLE:        Vortex induced oscillations at low Reynolds numbers:
	      hysteresis and vortex shedding modes
              
AUTHORS:      SP Singh and S Mittal

SUBMITTED TO: Journal of Fluids and Structures

REVIEW:	      First

SUBJECT MATERIAL

This manuscript describes a 2D numerical study of VIV of a circular
cylinder. There are two parts: (a) with Reynolds number held fixed at
100, the reduced velocity is varied; (b) with reduced velocity held
fixed at 4.92, the Reynolds number is varied. In the second part,
periodic VIV is found with P+S mode (as well as a 2S mode). In
general, the manuscript is very nicely written and easy to follow.

The manuscript could be accepted for publication in JFS, subject to
the following considerations being addressed.

MAIN POINTS

1. The authors are apparently unware of quite a similar published
study to the material covered in part (a), that of Blackburn &
Henderson, Experimental and Fluid Science V12,N2 (1996), who carried
out their investigation for Re=250. I suggest that the present
manuscript would be made stronger by some discussion of, comparison
to, and contrast with those results.

2. In (b), the occurrence of periodic VIV with a P+S wake mode is
interesting, and as the authors state, has not been previously
reported. However, again there is a previous relevant study, not
discussed. In the 2D, Re=500 forced oscillation study by Blackburn &
Henderson, JFM V385, (1999), a periodic `P+S' mode (which for reasons
discussed in that paper, was there named as belonging to the `A1'
solution branch) was found to provide time-average energy transfer to
the cylinder, thus it was capable of supporting vortex-induced
vibration. This would seem to support the authors' predictions, as
they find the P+S VIV mode at the higher Reynolds number end of their
computational range.

