THESIS TITLE: Multimodal vortex-induced vibration
              
AUTHOR:       Hayden Marcolo

INSTITUTION:  Dept Mech Engng, Monash University

REVIEW:	      First

STRENGTHS AND/OR WEAKNESSES OF THESIS
-------------------------------------

The thesis describes a well-planned and executed series of experiments
with the purpose of investigating multi-modal vortex-induced vibration
in shear flows. The review of previous work and description of the
design of the experimental apparatus, in particular with regard to
various practical constraints, are dealt with well, and at an
appropriate level. These kinds of experimental programmes, undertaken
in sizeable facilities, can be quite demanding, and I believe the
candidate has done an admirable job. As is often the case, lack of
accompanying flow visualisation tends to hinder the physical
interpretation of the measured results; however to include this as
well in an already extended project would have made it unreasonably
large.

The only quibble I had with data analysis relates to eq. (5.3) and
following, were it was not always clear if the author was considering
instantaneous forces or motion-correlated forces. It seems that they
are motion-correlated forces, in which case eqs. (5.3), (5.4), etc
will have additional (random) force coefficients to deal with forces
that are uncorrelated with motion over the long term. The candidate
may wish to consider this in any subsequent publications, but I do not
feel it justifies calling for an ammendment to the thesis.

Overall, a very interesting programme of work, well described, and
I trust the candidate will publish the results more widely.

