% $Id$
% CHAPTER SIX
% 6631 wds at 30/4/99

\setcounter{endnote}{0}
 
\chapter{Irrigation by Independent Producers from 1880}
\label{ch:indep}\addtoendnotes{\protect\section*{Chapter \thechapter}}
\markboth{
\textsc{Chapter \thechapter. Independent Producers}
}{
}

At the beginning of this period irrigation in Australia was
characteristically undertaken independently by private individuals or
companies, without involvement in a definite irrigation scheme.  In
Tasmania a few landholders on a tributary of the Macquarie River
continued to use water from Tooms Lake to irrigate their lands by
mutual arrangement, the essence of a group scheme.

The independence of private irrigators was reduced later in those
colonies where state control of water resources was established and
semi-government bodies were formed to manage irrigation in specific
areas.

Private irrigators, who were numerous and culturally diverse, provided
various commodities.  Vegetables, fruit, tobacco, and hops were
produced on small holdings with some use of irrigation by large
numbers of growers, often Chinese.  Cereals, fodder, and sugar cane
were watered almost exclusively by people of European origin,
generally on farms, pastoral stations, or plantations.  Methods of
irrigation were most varied, ranging from laborious hand-watering to
use of mechanical equipment driven by engines in situations requiring
supplies to be lifted, and including flood irrigation where water
could gravitate from a stream, as in Tasmania.

\section*{Cereals}

Agriculturalists were generally less involved with irrigation. Their
main crops were cereals adapted to dry-farming dependent on relative
abundance of rain in winter and spring; they cultivated comparatively
small holdings generally lacking surface water resources in abundance;
and few had time or money to use irrigation.  However, some farmers in
northern Victoria used water from adjacent river channels for their
wheat crops.  Woodford Patchell, a pioneer of irrigation in the
region, pumped water from the Loddon River at Kerang to irrigate more
than 100\,ac of mixed crops in 1882. John Garden began pumping from
Barr Creek, one of several channels near the Murray, to water 300\,ac
of cereals near Cohuna.  He demonstrated his equipment in November
1882 to 150 people from different parts of the northern plains,
including H.\,R.~Williams and Hugh McColl---parliamentarians elected
from the region.\fn{NSW V\&P 1886, RC~Water Conservation, 2nd Rept,
MoE Appendix~I, McKinney pp.\,17--26; \textsl{Australasian}, 18 Nov.\
1882.}

That year marks the beginning of extended use of irrigation in
northern Victoria, which followed the failure of district crops in
1881. Others who took up irrigation about the same time in this part
of the colony included William Webb of Rochester, whose pumping plant
installed in 1883 was regarded as one of the first in Victoria; Duncan
Leitch, whose supply from Gunbower Creek depended on an inflow from
the Murray River; Mr~Holding who irrigated 200\,ac of wheat near
Gunbower; and David Chrystal, who irrigated grass and cereals at
Torrumbarry by pumping from the Murray. The facilities for irrigation
with water from the Murray River led to the watering of nearly
5\,000\,ac of wheat by scores of irrigators in the Swan Hill shire in
1883--84.\fn{\textsl{Australasian}, 7 Jan.\ 1882; J.\,Inst.\ Eng.\
Aust.\ 1930, \textbf{2}, p.\,270; VicPP no.\,53 of 1885; MoE p.\,37;
\textsl{Leader}, 1 Dec.\ 1883; VicPP no.\,53 of 1885, MoE p.\,32;
VicPP vol.\,4, 1884; VicYearbook 1884, p.\,436.}

\section*{Fodder}

Many pastoralists in south-eastern Australia made use of irrigation.
Their holdings had been chosen with an eye to a secure supply of
water; in many cases much more than the essential stock and domestic
supply.  The chief interest of pastoralists in irrigation was to
improve their capacity to carry livestock either by watering natural
pasture in dry seasons or fodder crops such as lucerne or cereal hay.

In the early part of this period there was greater use of irrigation
for fodder crops in places where a start had been made previously.
One of these was Bacchus Marsh in central Victoria, where in 1883
Michael O'Connell, one of several local irrigators, was diverting
water by a race from the Lerderderg River to irrigate 70\,ac of
lucerne. In 1887 there were six steam plants in use for irrigation in
the locality.  Irrigators included Mr~Crook, who began using supplies
from the Lerderderg River in 1878, and W.~Grant who irrigated 12\,ac
of lucerne in 1885 using a centrifugal pump and steam engine.  In the
Victorian Gippsland district, the earlier use of water from springs
near Sale apparently prompted wider practice of irrigation at a time
of great demand for supplies to goldfields in the region.  At
Charlcote, near Sale, W.H.Palmer pumped water from the Avon river to
irrigate 300\,ac of grassland.\fn{VicPP no.\,53 of 1885,
p.\,xxxvii--viii, MoE p.\,271; \textsl{Australasian}, 1 Jan.\ 1887;
\citet{williams1936}; \citet[p.\,76]{priestley1984}.}

Western Victorian experience of irrigation was associated with streams
from the Grampians mountains.  In 1886 Samuel Carter pumped water from
the Wimmera River to irrigate natural pasture and lucerne on Walmer
pastoral station near Horsham.  Previously his family held Glenisla
station on the headwaters of the Glenelg River, south of Horsham,
where he first gained experience of
irrigation.\fn{\textsl{Australasian}, 9 Jan.\ 1886.}

Major developments occurred in the riverine plain stretching from
northern Victoria to the Lachlan River in New South Wales.  Irrigation
on the Murray Downs pastoral station on the Murray River in New South
Wales was extended to a further 40\,ac, at least partly to produce
suitable fodder for ostrich farming on the station in 1882. Near
Echuca, a major port for river-boats on the Murray, there were
opportunities for irrigation by pumping from both sides of the river.
On Perricoota station on the northern side, the firm of Robertson~\&
Wagner used irrigation to maintain the homestead garden and to produce
cereal hay for horses held there for use on its well known Cobb~\&~Co
coach-lines. The powerful engines and pumps used along this part of
the Murray to irrigate large areas replaced the horse-powered pumps,
windmills, and hydraulic rams used widely in the
past.\fn{\textsl{Australasian}, 23 Dec.\ 1882; \textsl{Town and
Country Journal}, 6 Aug.\ 1887.}

North of the Murray there was scattered use of irrigation.  The Werai
pastoral station established north-east of Wakool by the Gwynne family
in 1843 was one of the earliest scenes of irrigation in the region,
using water pumped from Colligen Creek, an effluent of the
Murrumbidgee River.  Production there of lucerne and other crops
became well known before 1886.  George Mair began irrigating fodder
crops at Groongal, on the north side of the Murrumbidgee, about 1882,
and in 1887 had a good fodder crop on 40\,ac, watered by pumping from
the river.  James Tyson took advantage of floods on the lower Lachlan
River by cutting channels through the river bank and diverting water
into adjacent depressions to give better growth of herbage for his
sheep. These achievements were reported in 1885.  By 1890 there was
irrigation by Phillips~\& Graves at Warbrecan, by David McCaughey at
Coree, and by Patrick McFarland at Barooga, where water was pumped
from the Murray to 100\,ac of lucerne.  After legislation in 1896 for
State control of water rights in New South Wales, licenses were
granted for use of water by private irrigators, the outstanding use
being that of Samuel McCaughey who in 1900 developed irrigation of
fodder and pastures at North Yanco.\fn{VicPD 1886, p.\,2763; NSW V\&P
118 of 1885; NSW RC~Water Conservation First Rept 1885--86;
\citet[p.\,53]{lloyd1988}; \citet[p.\,246]{buxton1967};
\textsl{Australasian}, 24 Jan.\ 1890.}

In the valley of the Lachlan River pastoralists began irrigation in
the 80s.  J.\,B.~Donkin, who held the Lake Cowal station, began
irrigating near the Lachlan about 1885.  Messrs Raymond~\& Nicholas
raised water 32\,ft from the river with a centrifugal pump to irrigate
25\,ac of maize and 5\,ac of potatoes near Forbes.  At Jemmalong, also
near Forbes, N.\,A.~Gatenby irrigated lucerne from the Lachlan; he
gained a government prize in 1890 for farm irrigation.  Downstream
near Lake Cargellico a syndicate put up a substantial dam on the
Lachlan in 1885 for irrigation.\fn{Procs First Vic.\ Irrig.\ Conf.\
1890, p.\, 130; \textsl{Leader}, 12 Sep.\ 1885; NSW Agr.\ Gaz.\
vol.\,2, 1891, p.\,163; \citet[p.\,118]{jeffcoat1988}.}

Near the south coast of New South Wales, the irrigation conducted on
the Kameruka estate of Robert~L. Tooth was regarded so highly by
judges of the irrigated farms competition that in 1891 it was awarded
first prize for the best system of irrigation in the colony.  On this
farm, just south of Bega, 30\,ac of lucerne were irrigated with water
drawn from Tantawanglo Creek by a pump driven by a steam engine and
raised more than 200\,ft to the top of a hill whence it flowed down
through the lucerne.  This property, where 1300 cows were milked daily
in summer, was then held to be one of the largest dairy farms in the
world.\fn{NSW Agr.\ Gaz.\ \textbf{2}, 1891, p.\,163 and \textbf{3},
1892, p.\,601.}

Another entrant in the irrigated farms competition of 1891 was the
farm of T.\,P.~Wills-Allen in the Gunnedah district of northern New
South Wales.  His introduction to irrigation had come as an
involuntary user of waste water since 1876 when he used a 30\,hp
engine to pump water from the Namoi River for a sheep-wash.  After its
use for this purpose, the water was allowed to flow over the land, a
practice followed each year until 1884 when Mr Wills-Allen was so
converted to irrigation that he watered 25\,ac of wheaten hay and a
stand of lucerne.\fn{NSW V\&P 1885, RC~Water Conservation,
MoE, pp.\,160--164.}

Irrigation was used on the Darling Downs of Queensland by at least two
pastoralists in the 1880s.  On Kings Creek, about 40 miles south of
Toowoomba near the railway to Warwick, Atticus Tooth, a cousin of
R.\,L.~Tooth involved with irrigation at Kameruka, New South Wales,
watered 22\,ac of black cracking clay with supplies delivered by a
steam-driven pump.  Then in 1888, Francis and Robert Gore began
irrigation at Yandilla on their 90\,000\,ac run on the Condamine River
near Pittsworth, south-west of Too\-woom\-ba.\fn{\textsl{Brisbane
Courier}, 28 Mar.\ 1884; \textsl{Queenslander}, 6 Apr.\ 1889.}

In South Australia, J.\,L.~Thompson at Beefacres near Adelaide
irrigated 12\,ac in 1881 including 5\,ac of fodder crops as well as
fruit and vegetables.\fn{NSW Agr.\ Gaz.\ \textbf{10}, 1899, p.\,802.}

\section*{Fruit}

Notable production from irrigated orchards was undertaken in the more
populous areas and in inland Australia before the establishment of
group schemes for irrigated horticulture.

In 1888 a Victorian government prize for irrigated crops was awarded
to David Milburn of Keilor who used water from the Maribyrnong River
to irrigate an orchard of 12 acres and a larger area of other crops.
Milburn was one the earliest commercial irrigators in Victoria.  The
Mason brothers established an orchard north of Shepparton about 1884
and by 1886 they pumped from the Goulburn River to irrigate 70 acres
of fruit trees.\fn{\textsl{Australasian}, 3 Mar.\ 1888, p.\,466;
\citet[p.\,57]{martin1955}.}

Another prize-winning irrigationist in Victoria was Robert Clark, a
miller and politician with fruit trees on his Riversdale property in
the Wimmera at Lower Norton, watered by pumping from Norton Creek.  In
1889 he was awarded a government prize.\fn{\textsl{Australasian}, 10
May 1890, p.\,898; \citet[p.\,xxiv]{powell1973}.}

Several properties near Sydney were being irrigated in the last decade
of the century.  Irrigated orchards were entered for the New South
Wales government competition for irrigated farms in 1891.  First prize
for orchards went to Mr~T.~Brien of Parramatta who irrigated 10\,ac of
citrus; he pumped water from a creek with a 6\,hp engine and used
iron pipes to carry supplies all over his orchard.  G.\,H.~Dempsey
followed a similar arrangement at Emu Plains, taking water from a well
with a Tangye pump driven by a 2\,hp Tangye engine and reticulating
the water through iron pipes to his citrus trees.\fn{NSW Agr.\
Gaz., \textbf{3} 1892, p.\,711.}

Near Echuca, Daniel Matthews pumped water from the Murray River in the
mid-80s to irrigate an orchard in New South Wales on the Maloga
Mission for Aborigines, which he established on land selected from the
Moira run leased by John~O'Shanassy. On the Victorian side,
A.\,D.~Jeffrey began irrigating fruit trees in 1887 a few miles from
Echuca, using a centrifugal pump to take water from the
river.\fn{\textsl{Town and Country Journal}, 6 Aug.\ 1887;
\citet[p.\,155]{priestley1965}.}

In Western Australia there had been very little experience of
irrigation before 1890.  Discoveries of gold at Kalgoorlie a few years
later led to a doubling of the colonial population within 10 years and
encouraged horticultural and agricultural industries.  In 1913 there
were more than 300 instances of small-scale irrigation of orchards and
vegetable gardens in the south-west part of the State, while by 1908
bananas were being grown under irrigation by Edward Angelo on the
Gascoyne River at Carnarvon.\fn{\citet[p.\,11]{oldham1913};
\citet{bolton1979}.}

In South Australia most irrigation of fruit trees was undertaken near
Adelaide in the lower Torrens valley where in 1892 there were more
than 200 pumps driven by wind, steam engines, and horse power to draw
water for fruit and vegetables.  After Robert Barr Smith acquired the
Torrens Park property near Mitcham, he built a reservoir in 1875 to
water the existing orangery of 600 trees.  This reservoir with a
capacity of 2 million gallons (9000\,kL) could provide 7\,ac-ft of
water---a great improvement on the arrangement made by the previous
owner, R.\,R.~Torrens.  One instance of irrigation for fruit growing
under arid conditions was near Port Augusta where mains supply water
from the nearby Flinders Range was used at Stirling North for fruit
and vegetables; in 1892 the orchards covered 40\,ha.  One of the
reasons for development of irrigation near Adelaide in the 90s was to
supply Broken Hill with fresh food; the expansion at Stirling North
was probably in response to the completion of the railway through the
Flinders Ranges to Oodnadatta.\fn{\citet[p.\,21]{green1892};
\citet[p.\,229]{priess1991}; \citet[p.\,62]{anderson1988}.}

Irrigation of citrus fruit and vegetables was practised at Bowen, the
earliest settlement in north Queensland, from the 1890s, using
underground water on areas which exceeded 600\,ac before
1920.\fn{H.\,E.\,A.~Eklund, Irrigation in Queensland, Qld
Agric.~J. \textbf{20}~\& \textbf{21}, 1923--24.}

Fruit was produced by Chinese at several points along the Darling
River.  At Wentworth, Chinese gardens were reported by John Stanley
James (`The Vagabond') in 1885; he found `John's garden on the banks
of the Darling is the only green oasis in the place'. Two years later
`the splendid orangery in the neighbourhood of Wentworth carried on by
Chinamen' was mentioned in the South Australian parliament.  Citrus
sold in Mildura in 1890 were grown at Wentworth on trees planted about
twenty years earlier---almost certainly by Chinese who could not have
sustained production in the arid climate without irrigation from the
Darling River.  At Bourke, fruit and vegetables in sufficient quantity
to supply the town were raised by Tim Yang and a score of Chinese
helpers from an irrigated garden of 3 to 4 acres in 1885.  Bourke was
then a major port on the Darling, where copper ore from mines at
Cobar, a hundred miles south, was shipped to South
Australia.\fn{\textsl{Melbourne Argus}, 10 Jan.\ 1884; SAPD 1887,
p.\,310; NSW V\&P 1886, RC~Water Conservation, 1st Rept, MoE p.\,223;
\textsl{Queenslander}, 25 Oct.\ 1890.}

\section*{Hops}

Hop gardens were irrigated at several places in Tasmania and Victoria.
During the boom in hop production in the 80s there were reports of
irrigation from different parts of Victoria, but in Tasmania the
expansion was mainly in the Derwent valley, where its use became
common following trials at New Norfolk much earlier.  In Victoria hops
were grown most extensively in Gippsland at first, but irrigation was
not common there in 1882. In 1883--84 there were five growers
irrigating 84\,ac near Bairnsdale.  One instance was the hop-garden of
J.\,A.~Taylor near Bairnsdale, where in 1885 water was lifted 20 feet
from the Mitchell River by steam power to irrigate
50~acres.\fn{\textsl{Australasian}, May 1882, p.\,538; VicPP no.\,53
of 1885, RC~Water Supply, Further Progr.\ Rept MoE, p.\,255.}

Hop production increased along the Ovens valley in the north-east,
where about 40 growers irrigated almost 300\,ac in 1883--84. One of
the most prominent growers was Hiram Crawford who used two waterwheels
on the Ovens River to irrigate 50\,ac. This was an enterprise
undertaken after his retirement to the district in 1876 after a busy
life as gold-digger, coach-line proprietor, and manager of a shopping
arcade in Melbourne.  W.~Lyons of Everton also used a waterwheel for
irrigation.  Another Victorian area where hops were irrigated was in
the Yarra valley near Healesville.\fn{VicPP 1884, Statistical
Register; \citet[p.\,91]{pearce1976}; \citet[p.\,118]{woods1985};
Vic.\ RC~Vegetable Products, 5th Progr.\ Rept 1888, Q8711;
\textsl{Australasian}, 18 Mar.\ 1882.}

The Chinese were involved with hop-gardens in north-eastern Victoria
during the 80s, though mainly as labourers for Europeans. The
achievement of the Panlook brothers in the Eurobin district as
hop-growers dates back to 1890 when four sons of a former storekeeper
on the Buckland goldfields returned to the district and started
growing tobacco and hops.  Within a few years the brothers had a
substantial area under hops which they irrigated. Their farm became
the outstanding Victorian source of hops.\fn{Vic.\ RC~Vegetable
Products, 5th Progr.\ Rept, 1888, Q8699; \citet[p.\,127]{carter1968};
\citet[p.\,106]{robertson1973}.}

Hops were cultivated in some South Australian localities with moderate
rainfall, as in the Adelaide hills and near Mount Gambier.  The only
record of irrigation refers to David Murray's Rockford Estate on the
Onkaparinga River near Mylor, where 10\,ac of hops were cultivated in
1896.\fn{\citet[p.\,70]{pearce1976}; \citet{oneill1974}.}

\section*{Sugar Cane}

Irrigation of sugar cane began in north Queensland about 1879.  This
crop had been grown in some coastal districts for many years; its area
had expanded in the 1860s, particularly near Mackay.  The need for
adequate soil moisture for this crop during summer was met at places
along the coast where rainfall reached 80 to 100 inches per annum.
Archibald Macmillan saw the possibility of growing sugar cane under
irrigation on the delta of the Burdekin River, where rainfall would be
inadequate for the crop but many freshwater lagoons could provide for
irrigation.  This development occurred after Macmillan floated a sugar
planting company in 1879 and commenced irrigation by pumping from
these ponds.  Then other sugar plantations, also dependent on
irrigation, were established on the delta at a time of boom for the
industry.  High prices for sugar on the world market then stimulated
the establishment on the delta of other plantations with indentured
labour from Pacific islands.\fn{QldPP, vol.\,iv, 1889, RC~Sugar
Industry; \citet[p.\,136]{bolton1972}.}

By 1889 the irrigation of cane on the delta involved at least three
plantations: the Pioneer plantation of Drysdale Brothers, that of the
Young brothers at Kalamia, and the Seaforth plantation.  Charles Young
of Kalamia gave evidence to the Royal Commission on the Sugar Industry
that irrigation of cane had been carried out on the estate since
1885. By 1889 the area commanded by his irrigation channels was
530\,ac.\fn{QldPP 1889, vol.\,iv, \&~MoE.}

Irrigation of sugar cane gradually extended to involve almost
8\,000\,ac by 1915 and was used also in the Bundaberg district, where
irrigation began about 1888 at Bingera and about 1900 at
Fairymead.\fn{H.\,E.\,A.~Eklund, (1923, 1924), Irrigation in
Queensland, Qld Agr.~J. \textbf{20} pp.\,105--106, \& \textbf{21}
pp.\,289--308.}

\section*{Tobacco}

Tobacco-growing was taken up by Chinese in the 1860s when alluvial
mining in south-eastern Australia was flagging and imports of tobacco
from the United States were curtailed by the Civil War.  Although
production became the virtual monopoly of the Chinese during the last
quarter of the century, there are only occasional references to their
use of irrigation for this crop.  During the 1880s Ah~Yon told a
government enquiry about his production of hops and tobacco in
north-eastern Victoria; he then had 20 acres under crop.  Answering a
question about watering the tobacco plants, Ah~Yon said that he only
watered twice, both at planting time.  James Henley, an American, told
the Commission that he watered his tobacco seedlings in the region
only when they were planted but Chinese watered theirs `a good many
times'.  Share-farming was the method followed by several Chinese
tobacco-growers in north-east Victoria.\fn{Vic.\ RC~Veg.\ Products,
5th Prog.\ Rept, 1888, p.\,30, Q8449;
\citet[pp.\,124--26]{robertson1973}.}

Another report concerns Millicent in south-eastern South Australia
where in 1888 a Royal Commission was told by S.\,J.~Stuckey and
R.~Slater that Chinese irrigated tobacco in their
district.\fn{SAPP no.\,28 of 1888, RC~Land Laws of SA, MoE,
p.\,107.}

\section*{Vegetables}

Irrigation most familiar to Australians was undertaken by Chinese in
small market gardens seen in many urban areas.  It was used also by
Chinese gardeners employed on pastoral stations.

Market gardeners of British origin also made use of irrigation in this
period.  Their gardens were more confined to the outskirts of cities.
One case concerns Bacchus Marsh in Victoria, where during the 1880s Mr
Pearce pumped from the Lerderderg River into a race taking water to an
area of chicory and spread it as required through canvas hose attached
to the aqueduct.  The hose was cut in lengths of 20\,ft, which were
joined as required to begin watering the furthest point then gradually
shortened so that a stretch of land was irrigated.  Others cultivated
swampy areas at the south east of Melbourne and near Perth, thus
reducing the need for irrigation.  Market gardens in the lower Torrens
valley became the main source of vegetables for the Adelaide market,
with subsequent expansion in the 1890s to the Piccadilly valley in the
Mount Lofty Range, where supplementary irrigation was widely used.  At
Piccadilly, Summertown and Uraidla, springs were the main source of
water; wells and creeks also made a contribution.  Piping was used to
carry water from springs, whose discharge was improved on some
properties by tunnelling into hillsides.  One installation took
advantage of a tunnel made earlier in a search for gold.  The gardens
were usually less than 10 acres in
extent.\fn{\citet[p.\,53]{aasian1885}; \citet{hallack1893}.}

During the last quarter of the century Chinese gardens existed in all
Australian colonies and supplied people in towns and the country.  By
1870 the industry which afforded the Chinese most employment was
`market-gardening of which they had almost a monopoly; 75 per cent of
the whole of the vegetables being grown by Chinese'.  A French visitor
shared this view in 1882, claiming market-gardening and cabinet making
were industries almost completely in the hands of Chinese.  In
Melbourne a visitor in 1890 found that `half of the vegetables sold in
the market are from Chinese gardeners'. The Chinese gardens were noted
for careful cultivation, use of fertilizers including human excrement,
and a good supply of water.  During this period it was recognised that
the Chinese presented an example of what could be achieved with
irrigation.\fn{\citet[vol.\,3, pp.\,1,~331]{coghlan1918};
\citet[p.\,207]{lameslee1883}; \textsl{Queenslander}, 6 Sep.\ 1889.}

By 1880 Chinese gardens were common in eastern Australia.  They were
established initially wherever Chinese congregated for alluvial
mining.  As that type of mining declined in a district, many Chinese
moved off to new minefields, returned to their homeland, or took up
other occupations, notably market-gardening in south-eastern Australia
often near centres of reef mining such as Bendigo and Walhalla in
Victoria.  In the north the discovery of alluvial goldfields attracted
thousands of Chinese, especially to the Palmer River in north
Queensland and Pine Creek in the Northern Territory.  Some of these
diggers came from Victoria and New South Wales but many were new
arrivals, apparently organised in much the same way as the earlier
flow of Chinese gold-seekers to Australia.  Chinese communities began
gardens to cater primarily for themselves but vegetables were also
sold to others.

A good supply of vegetables was important for all in the Australian
colonies.  This produce had an accepted place in the diet of Chinese,
for others it relieved the monotony in many country areas of living
off mutton, bread and tea.  One account of life on a sheep station in
the 80s described the variety of food at a neighbouring station, due
to the presence of a lady and a Chinaman.
\begin{quote}
	In the train of the squatter's wife come such luxuries and
	delusions as pastry, puddings, and preserves, and the
	beneficent Chinaman employed as a gardener brings in fresh
	`weletables' every day from his continuously irrigated plot of
	land.\fn{\citet[p.\,202]{clark1955}.}
\end{quote}
But as well as providing relief from a monotonous diet, the vegetables
from Chinese gardens were valuable because `they undoubtedly saved
thousands of Europeans from scurvy in the goldrush days'.  This
complaint was common among those living in the inland without access
to fruit and vegetables or antidotes such as lime
juice.\fn{\citet[p.\,201]{rolls1981}; \citet[p.\,26]{cannon1973}.}

During the gold rush in the `top end' of the Northern Territory in the
1880s, there were numerous Chinese gardens between Darwin and Pine
Creek.  At Bridge Creek, near Adelaide River, there were a dozen
Chinese gardeners, who could `ward off the scurvy by plentiful growths
of vegetables'.  Another instance of the contribution made by Chinese
gardeners in combatting scurvy relates to Milparinka in the extreme
north-west of New South Wales.  It was the centre of a gold-rush early
in the 80s and thousands lived there.  Some died from typhoid and
others from scurvy.  Then a number of Chinese `began to drift across
from the Darling River. They planted vegetable gardens and almost
simultaneously the new diet ended the
disease'~(scurvy).\fn{\citet[p.\,40]{sowden1882};
\citet[p.\,65]{farwell1965}.}

Irrigation by Chinese gardeners is recorded from all colonies though
with few accounts for Western Australia.  The involvement of Chinese
gardeners with irrigation in Western Australia in this period was
insignificant until the gold rush in the south-west.  Many Chinese
were brought to the colony as coolies before the goldrush; they worked
mainly in the north on pastoral stations.  However, by 1888, after the
first discoveries of gold in the south-west, there were 54 Chinese
engaged in market-gardening in the Perth district and by 1891 that
occupation involved 102 of the barely 900 Chinese in the colony.
Vegetables were grown by Chinese, presumably with irrigation, in the
early days of the Pilbara goldfield, before its proclamation as
such.\fn{\citet[p.\,54]{oreilly1984}.}  Much of the market-gardening
by Chinese near Perth was conducted on swamps, where irrigation may
not have been involved but it is likely that the description of one
site on the South Perth foreshore they leased from 1882 was not
unique:
\begin{quote}
	The land was criss-crossed with hand-dug canals, and pitted
	with wells.  Vegetables, varying seasonally, made a changing
	kaleidoscope of colour, their organised rows contrasting
	starkly with the unruly bamboo which flanked the gardens.
	Chinese, struggling under the weight of their yokes carrying
	watering cans, laboured for endless hours hand-watering their
	produce.\fn{\citet[p.\,11]{ryan1995}.}
\end{quote}

A vivid picture of Chinese irrigation at Ballarat was given by Henry
Cornish, who travelled from India in the late 1870s and visited many
parts of eastern Australia. At this renowned area of alluvial
gold-mining, where thousands of Chinese were settled, he was assured
that they had taught the colonists the art of market gardening.
\begin{quote}
	The way in which the Chinese convert barren wastes of land
	into flourishing gardens is a sight full of instruction for
	English agriculturists. Their method of cultivation is very
	similar to that of the Hindus, the irrigation channels and
	small reservoirs introduced in the Chinaman's garden being
	much the same as we see in India.\fn{\citet[p.\,157]{cornish1880}.}
\end{quote}

In 1884 an appreciation of Chinese gardeners was given by an
agricultural journalist, apparently T.\,K.~Dow who had previously
reported on irrigation in America: at Elmore in northern Victoria,
\begin{quote}
	I passed a large Chinese garden on the banks of the Campaspe,
	and the Celestials were pumping water by horse power to
	irrigate the plants.  The Chinese were the first to
	demonstrate the benefits of irrigation in northern Victoria,
	and the sooner they are extensively imitated in this
	particular the better it will be for the condition of our
	settlers in the northern areas.\fn{\textsl{Australasian}, 9
	Feb.\ 1884.}
\end{quote}

Another acknowledgment to Chinese irrigators came in 1892 from Alfred
Deakin, a prominent Victorian politician deeply involved in the
development of irrigation: `For the supply of fresh vegetables from
farms within sufficient distance of city markets irrigation is an
effective agency, familiar enough in most towns in the shape of
Chinese gardens'.\fn{\citet{deakin1892}.}

New South Wales, with more than three times the area of Victoria,
lagged behind the latter in population until the 1890s; its
wheat-growing was neglected until the 90s.  Vast inland areas were
held then in large pastoral stations, many of which employed Chinese
to raise vegetables and ornamental plants by means of irrigation.  So
common was this practice that one exception---at the Murray Downs
station on the Murray---surprised the widely-travelled journalist
G.\,A.~Brown~(`Bruni') sufficiently to remark: `One is so used to find
nothing but Chinese gardeners everywhere north of Victoria that to
meet with a European gardener is a matter of surprise'.  That these
Chinese gardeners relied on irrigation is indicated by the report that
about 1890 the work available at some pastoral stations for itinerant
workers or `swaggies' in the Riverina included working the `Chinese
treadwheel' to provide water for irrigated
gardens.\fn{\citet[p.\,131]{wadham1957}; \citet{parker1982};
\textsl{Australasian}, 23 Dec.\ 1882.;
\citet[p.\,261]{buxton1967}.}

Chinese gardeners sold food in Sydney and many country towns. Hugh
McKinney, the irrigation engineer, found `the Chinaman has never been
at a loss to find suitable places for his garden near towns in the
western plains'.  Their activities along the Macquarie River were
noticed in 1880 by Marin La~Meslee.  Chinese gardens along the Darling
River supplied river towns and the mining centres of Cobar and Broken
Hill.  Up to 1884, according to McKinney, `with few exceptions,
irrigation in New South Wales was practised only by Chinamen, who in
this respect may and very possibly do claim to have been the pioneers
of civilisation'.\fn{H.~McKinney, J.\,R.~Soc.\ NSW 1893, \textbf{27},
p.\,384; \citet{lameslee1883}.}

By 1881 Queensland held more Chinese than New South Wales and almost
as many as Victoria.  They were scattered from south to north and were
known both as industrious miners and skilful gardeners.  Alexander
Boyd knew of these people from his experiences in many districts as a
schoolmaster and agricultural journalist.\fn{\citet{logan1979}.}  In
1882 he described them:
\begin{quote}
	As market-gardeners they are matchless.  No soil is so poor
	that a Chinese gardener cannot raise vegetables of every
	description on it.  Manuring and irrigation are the secrets of
	their success.  Every night the gardeners may be seen swinging
	the two man bucket and transferring the necessary moisture
	from the waterhole to the heads of the rows of vegetables,
	whence it permeates through the soil and running along
	innumerable trenches, prepared for the reception of water,
	carries the fertilising medium all over the
	ground.\fn{\citet[p.\,236]{boyd1882}.}
\end{quote}

Alluvial gold mining was never important in South Australia and its
Chinese population remained the least of all the Australian colonies
at the end of the century.  A few Chinese thought to be descendants of
shepherds employed before 1850 became market-gardeners with a good
supply of water in the 80s from First Creek near Waterfall Gully in
Adelaide.  Other Chinese raised vegetables at Innamincka with water
drawn from Coopers Creek in the 1890s.\fn{\citet[pp.\,31,
192]{warburton1981}; \textsl{Adelaide Advertiser} 4 Apr.\ 1989;
\citet{tolcher1986}.}

During the period of tin-mining in north-eastern Tasmania, from the
70s, there were several Chinese gardens in the area.  With the decline
of this mining, other gardens were developed to supply Launceston and
Hobart.

Chinese market gardeners were not invariably irrigators.  In southern
Australia some of these people gave up production of vegetables at the
height of summer.  They did not need irrigation in parts of north
Queensland which remained moist throughout the year.  In regions with
two distinct seasons a lack of water in the dry season would have
limited vegetable production.  This may have been the case in the
Northern Territory, where the Chinese practice of market gardening is
not well documented despite indications that many people were
involved.  During the gold-rush period in the Territory during
1875--85, Chinese gardens supplied a variety of produce to miners and
to residents of Darwin.  One account refers to many such gardens
between Darwin and Pine Creek during the wet season when sweet
potatoes were an important product.  Julian Tenison-Woods, a geologist
and cleric well-known in South Australia, visited the Northern
Territory in the dry season of 1886 and reported the production by
Chinese gardeners of maize, sugar-cane, sweet potato and culinary
vegetables alongside the Margaret River. The existence of permanent
water also at several well-known springs, as at Rum Jungle, apparently
made it possible for vegetable production to be continued by Chinese
and other gardeners using irrigation throughout the prolonged dry
season in the Territory.\fn{\citet{sowden1882}; SAPP no.\,122 of
1886.}

Chinese irrigators occupied land more by lease than by freehold
tenure.  Accounts of market-gardening in south-eastern suburbs of
Melbourne indicate that Chinese gardeners leased land from European
market-gardeners.  In the 1880s, Chen~Ah~Teak was the owner or lessee
of more than 6 market gardens around Sydney.  At Bourke, Tim~Yung had
by 1886 purchased an existing garden of 6\,ac.  In many parts of
northern Australia it is likely that the Chinese irrigators were
squatters.\fn{NSWPP RC~Chinese Gambling, 1891; NSW V\&P LA
vol.\,6,1885--86, no.\,118a, RC~Water Conservation, First rept, MoE,
p.\,223.}

\section*{Means of irrigation}

Irrigation in the period generally required some means of lifting
water to the designated area.  Delivery by gravitation often required
the installation of a weir or dam to divert part of the stream flow to
a race or canal discharging at the required area; this system probably
was a feature of Tasmanian irrigation but was not widely used on the
mainland.  Pumping of water from perennial rivers and creeks was
undertaken by many irrigators; many of the streams were so deeply
incised in the landscape that pumps were required to lift water to a
significant height.  In order to obtain a supply sufficient to water a
large area without delay, pumps and engines of adequate capacity and
power were needed; generally the essential equipment included a
horizontal steam engine and a centrifugal pump.  This type of pump is
adapted to lifting water to a height of 25 to 30 feet; it was useful
to those irrigators on the riverine plain in Victoria who needed to
lift water less than 10 feet.  Some of them depended on adequate
supplies in creeks filled by overflow from the Murray River between
Echuca and Swan Hill, and as Duncan Leitch at Gunbower soon found
there were seasons when water was not available for pumping.  Such
experience led to an interest in seeking more dependable supplies of
water.\fn{NSW V\&P, 1886, RC~Water Conservation, 2nd Rept MoE Appendix
I, McKinney pp.\,17--26; VicPP no.\,53 of 1885, RC~Water Supply MoE,
p.\,37.}

The use of steam engines and centrifugal pumps was taken up at a time
when there were several Australian makers of this equipment.
J.~Robison of Melbourne was apparently the first to manufacture
centrifugal pumps in Australia; application of his products to
irrigation was advertised frequently in the
press.\fn{\citet[p.\,192]{cannon1975}; J.\,G.~Burnell, (1934) Inst.\
Eng.\ Aust.\ J.}

John O'Shanassy, a former Premier of Victoria, acquired the Moira run
on the New South Wales side of the river in 1862 and subsequently took
up Madowla Park on the Lower Moira run---on the opposite side of the
river.  His son Matthew was irrigating at Madowla Park in 1887, using
a steam engine and centrifugal pump to discharge river water into an
elevated flume running to the homestead area 3/4\,mile away. An
unusual feature was the mounting of engine and pump on a barge to
allow irrigation of the O'Shanassy lands on both sides of the
river.\fn{\citet{ingham1974a}; \textsl{Town and Country Journal}, 6
Aug.\ 1887, p.\,270; \citet[p.\,108]{coulson1979}.}

So popular was the more powerful equipment, available from different
engineering firms in Victoria, that in the 1890s there were said to be
90 pumping plants along the river between Swan Hill and
Echuca.\fn{\citet[p.\,127]{feldtmann1973}.}

How did the Chinese water their gardens?  Illustrations in the 19th
century generally show a man carrying two buckets of water at the ends
of a bamboo stick or yoke carried over the shoulder.  But there was
considerable variety in their arrangement of water supply.  In New
South Wales during the 1880s Chinese gardeners were using steam
engines to pump water from rivers or wells.  Tim~Yung at Bourke drew
water from a well by means of a 6\,hp steam-driven pump.  On the
Hawkesbury River, Chinese gardeners also used steam power to pump
their water from the river.  Other Chinese used horse-powered pumps,
as at Elmore and Katamatite in the Goulburn Valley of Victoria.
Innamincka in South Australia was one of few places known to have a
water-wheel raising supplies to a Chinese garden of about one acre.
It was described as `a magnificent water-wheel, the workmanship of
which was admired by all who saw it'.\fn{\textsl{Australasian}, Feb.\
1884, p.\,186; \citet[p.\,51]{dunlop1978};
\citet[p.\,107]{tolcher1986}.}  One of the simplest machines for
raising water was the type of pump first used in alluvial mining and
described in 1853:
\begin{quote}	
	Others use a Chinese pump, called a belt-pump, which the
	Chinese took to California, and which Californian diggers are
	using here.  The belt- pump consists simply of a long wooden
	pipe or tunnel, about six inches square, at the upper end of
	which is a wheel turning a long band of canvas, the two ends
	of which are sewed together so that it forms a circle.  On
	this band are fixed upright square pieces of board at regular
	distances; and as the wheel is turned, these pieces of board
	move onward with the band, enter the lower end of the tunnel,
	and carrying the water with them, discharge it at the
	mouth.\fn{\citet[p.\,97]{howitt1885}.}
\end{quote}

In urban areas, some market gardeners depended on mains supply water.
Thus in Hawthorn, Victoria, Chinese gardens became established at a
distance from the Yarra River only after the reticulated supply of Yan
Yean water became available from 1870.  Mains supply water was also
the basis for irrigation in South Australia at Stirling
North.\fn{\citet[p.\,81]{mcwilliam1978}; \citet{green1892}.}

%\section*{References}
%1. NSW V\&P 1886, R.C.Water Conservation, 2nd Rept, MoE Appendix I,
%    McKinney pp.17-26.	        
%2. Australasian, 18/11/1882.
%3. Australasian, 7/1/1882.
%4. J.Inst.Eng.Aust. 1930,vol. 2, p.270, VicPP No.53 of 1885, MoE p.37,\&
%    Leader, 1/12/1883, VicPP No. 53 of 1885, MoE p.32.
%5. VicPP Vol.4,1884, VicYearbook 1884, p.436. 
%6. VicPP No 53 of 1885,p.xxxviii.
%7. Australasian, 1/1/1887.
%8. W.Williams, A History Of Bacchus Marsh. . . 1836-1936, 1936, \&
%    VicPP No 53 of 1885, MoE p.271.
%9. Susan Priestley, The Victorians: Making Their Mark, 1984, p.76.
%10. VicPP No.53 of 1885, p.xxxvii.
%11. Australasian, 9/1/1886.
%12. Australasian, 23/12/1882.
%13. Town and country journal, 6/8/1887.
%14. VicPD 1886,p.2763.
%15. NSW V\&P 118 of 1885.
%16. NSW R.C.Water Conservation First Rept 1885-86; C.J.Lloyd, Either
%      Drought Or Plenty, 1988,p.53.  
%17. G.L.Buxton, The Riverina 1861-1891, 1967. p.246, \&  Australasian,
%      24/1/1890.
%18.  Procs First Vict.Irrig.Conf. 1890, p.130.
%19. Leader, 12/9/1885.
%20. NSW Agr.Gaz. Vol.2, 1891, p.163.
%21. K.Jeffcoat, More Precious Than Gold, 1988, p.118.
%22. NSW Agr.Gaz.vol.2, 1891, p.163.
%23. NSW Agr.Gaz., vol.3, 1892, p.601.
%24. NSW V\&P 1885, R.C.Water Conservation, MoE, pp160-164.
%25. Brisbane Courier, 28/3/1884.
%26. Queenslander, 6/4/1889.
%27. NSW Agr.Gaz. vol.10, 1899, p.802.
%28. Australasian, 3/3/1888, p.466.
%29. C.S.Martin, Irrigation And Closer Settlement In The Shepparton District,
%      1836-1906, 1955, p.57.
%30. Australasian, 10/5/1890, p.898, J.M.Powell(ed), Yeomen And Bureaucrats,
%      1973, p.xxiv.
%31. NSW Agr.Gaz., vol.3 1892, p.711.
%32. Town and Country Journal, 6/8/1887.
%33. Susan Priestley, Echuca, A Centenary History, 1965, p.155.
%34. H.Oldham, Irrigation And Water Conservation In Western Australia,
%      1913,p.11,  \& ADB vol 7, p.70.
%35. J.J.Green and A.Molineux, Irrigation, 1892, p.21.
%36. K.Preiss \& Pamela Oborn, The Torrens Park Estate, 1991, p.229.
%37. R.J.Anderson, Solid Town, History Of Port Augusta, 1988, p.62.
%38. H.E.A.Eklund, Irrigation In Queensland, Qld Agric.J. vols 20 \& 21, 
%     1923-24.   
%39. Melbourne Argus, 10/1/1884.
%40. SAPD 1887, p.310.
%41. Queenslander, 25/10/1890.
%42. NSW V\&P1886, R.C.Water Conservation, 1st Rept,MoE p.223.
%43. Australasian, May 1882, p.538.
%44. VicPP No.53 of 1885, R.C.Water Supply, Further Progr.Rept
%      MoE, p.255.
%45. VicPP 1884, Statistical Register.
%46. Helen Pearce, The Hop Industry In Australia, 1976, p.91.
%47. Carole Woods, Beechworth, A Titan's Fields, 1985, p.118.
%48. Vic R.C.Vegetable Products, 5th Progr.Rept 1888, Q8711.
%49. Australasian, 18/3/1882.
%50. Vic R.C.Vegetable Proucts, 5th Progr.Rept,1888, Q8699.
%51. J.Carter, Stout Hearts And Leathery Hands, 1968, p.127; Kay
%      Robertson, Myrtleford, Gateway To The Alps, 1973, p.106.
%52. Helen Pearce, 1976, p.70 \& ADB Vol.5, David Murray, p.319.
%53. QldPP, Vol.iv, 1889, R.C.Sugar Industry.
%54. G.C.Bolton, A Thousand Miles Away, A History Of North Queensland
%       to 1920, 1972, p.136. 		
%55. QldPP 1889, vol.iv, R.C.Sugar Industry.
%56. QldPP 1889, R.C.Sugar Industry, MoE.
%57. H.E.A.Eklund, Irrigation In Queensland, Qld Agr.J. vol.20, 1923,
%      p.105-06, vol.21, 1924, pp. 289-308.
%58. Vic R.C.Veg.Products, 5th Prog.Rept,1888, p.30.
%59. Vic R.C.Veg.Products, 5th Prog.Rept, 1888, Q8449.
%60. Kay Robertson, 1973,pp.124-126.
%61. SAPP No.28 of 1888, R.C.Land Laws of S.A., MoE, p.107.
%62. The Australasian Farmer, 1885, p.53.
%63. E.H.Hallack, Toilers Of The Hills, 1893/1987.
%64. T.A.Coghlan, Labour And Industry In Australia, 1918, vol.3, p.1331.
%65. E.M.La Meslee, The New Australia,1883,  trans.R.Ward 1973, p.207.
%66. Queenslander, 6/9/1889.
%67. C.M.H.Clark, Select Documents In Australian History 1851-1900,
%       1955, p.202.
%68. E.Rolls, A Million Wild Acres, 1981, p.201.
%69. M.Cannon, Australia In The Victorian Age, Life In The Country, 1978,
%       p.26.
%70. W.J.Sowden, The Northern Territory As It Is, 1882, p.40.
%71. G.Farwell, Ghost Towns Of Australia, 1969, p.65.
%72. Jan Ryan, Ancestors: Chinese In Colonial Australia, 1995.
%73. M.J.O'Reilly, Bowyangs And Boomerangs, 1984, p.54.
%74. Jan Ryan, 1995, p.11.
%75. H.Cornish, Under The Southern Cross, 1880, p.157.
%76. Australasian, 9/2/1884.
%77. A.Deakin, Irrigation In Australia, Year-book of Australia,1892.
%78. S.Wadham, R.K.Wilson \& Joyce Wood, Land Utilization In
%      Australia, 1957,p. 131.
%79. K.L.Parker, My Bush Book, 1982.
%80. Australasian, 23/12/1882.
%81. G.L.Buxton, The Riverina 1861-1891, 1967, p.261.
%82. H.McKinney, J.R.Soc.NSW 1893, v.27, p.384.
%83. E.M.La Meslee, 1883, trans. R.Ward, 1973.
%84. H.McKinney, J.R.Soc.NSW 1893, v.27.
%85. G.N.Logan, W.A.J.Boyd, ADB Vol.7, 1979, p.374.
%86. A.J.Boyd, Old Colonials, 1882/1974, p.236.
%87. Elizabeth Warburton, The Paddocks Beneath, A History Of Burnside from
%       Its Beginning, 1981, pp 31 \& 192, \& Adelaide Advertiser 4/4/1989.
%88. Helen M.Tolcher, Drought Or Deluge, Man In The Coopers Creek
%    Region, 1986.
%89. W.J.Sowden, 1882.
%90. SAPP No. 122 of 1886.
%91. NSWPP R.C.Chinese Gambling, 1891.
%92. NSW V\&P LA Vol.6,1885-86, No 118a , R.C.Water Conservation, First 
%      rept, MoE, p.223. 
%93. NSW V\&P, 1886, R.C.Water Conservation, 2nd Rept 
%      MoE Appendix I, McKinney p.17-26.		  
%94. VicPP No.53 of 1885, R.C.Water Supply MoE, p.37.
%95. M.Cannon, Australia In The Victorian Age, Life In The Cities, 1988,
%       p.192,\&  J.G.Burnell, 1934 Inst.Eng.Aust.J.
%96. S.M.Ingham, Sir John O'Shanassy, ADB vol.5,1974.
%97. Town and Country Journal, 6/8/1887, p.270.
%98. Helen Coulson, Echuca-Moama, Murray River Neighbours, 1979, p.108.
%99. A.Feldtmann, Swan Hill, 1973, p.127.
%100. Australasian, Feb.1884, p.186, \& A.J.Dunlop, Wide Horizons, 1978,
%        p.51.
%101. Helen M.Tolcher, 1986, p.107.
%102. W.Howitt, Land,Labour And Gold, 1855/1972, p.97.
%103. Gwen McWilliam, Hawthorn Peppercorns, 1978, p.81.
%104. J.J.Green \& A.Molineux, Irrigation, 1892.
