% $Id$
% CHAPTER NINE 
% At 1/5/99 effective length was 5948 words

\chapter{Irrigation Colonies at Mildura and Renmark}

Many settlements for irrigation of relatively unoccupied land were
begun abroad late in the 19th century and became known as irrigation
colonies. Those in southern California were promoted commercially,
with sales of land and supply of water for orchards and grape vines.1
In the Punjab province of India, the British government built major
irrigation canals and made settlements, also known as canal colonies,
for production of wheat and cotton by colonists drawn from other
areas.2

The spread of irrigation in America encouraged one Australian in 1884
to propose an irrigation settlement on the Murray River in South
Australia but it was left to George and W.\,B.~Chaffey, Canadian
brothers with experience of Californian irrigation, to launch the
first irrigation colonies in 1887 at Mildura and Renmark on that
river. These ventures provided models for other irrigation schemes in
Australia and therefore deserve detailed consideration.

\section{Chaffey enterprises in California}

George Chaffey (1848--1932) and his brother William Benjamin
(1856--1926) had successfully launched two colonies in California by
1884.  William and a younger brother left Ontario, Canada, in 1878
with parents who were persuaded by a fellow Canadian to follow his
example by acquiring land in the irrigation colony known as Riverside,
then embracing about 9000\,ac of land 60 miles east of Los
Angeles. Founded in 1870, its orchards and vines were then watered
from canals supplied by gravity from the Santa Ana river.  In 1876 it
gained a railway connection across the continent and by 1880 Riverside
was distinguished by its successful introduction of Washington navel
oranges to California.3 As the sales of land were made by promoters
also engaged in selling water from their canal, settlers faced
difficulties with water supply as land sales improved.  Elwood Mead,
the American who later took charge of irrigation in Victoria,
described the situation in the region:
\begin{quote}
	the spirit of speculation in which Californian civilisation
	was born soon fastened upon irrigation and ran a mad race
	through Southern California\ldots Men began to dream of a new
	race of millionaires, created by making merchandise of the
	melting snows, by selling `rights' to the `renting' of water,
	and collecting annual toll from a new class of society, to be
	known as `water tenants'.4
\end{quote}

George Chaffey, a mechanical engineer with experience of steamboats on
inland waterways in the United States and Canada, visited Riverside in
1880, and decided to stay after finding opportunities there and
elsewhere in southern California for his talents and initiative.  In
1882 the brothers began promotion of their first irrigation colony,
known as Etiwanda.  They purchased 1000\,ac on the slopes at the foot
of the lofty San Gabriel mountains with rights to a limited water
supply from mountain canyons.  Land was sold in blocks of 10\,ac on
the basis that a buyer gained shares in a mutual water company in
proportion to acreage held and was thus assured of water supply.  Its
supply for irrigation was by gravitation in concrete pipes, thus
eliminating losses suffered with earthen channels.

Encouraged by successful promotion of irrigation at Etiwanda, the
Chaffeys in 1883 launched a colony named Ontario on their purchase of
6216\,ac.  Its situation and water supply were similar to those of
Etiwanda and it was adjacent to a railway.  The appeal of growing
oranges was then important in promoting irrigation colonies in the
region, and within a few years more than 100 sales, mainly for
holdings of 10 or 20\,ac at Ontario, had been made to people from
various parts of the United States and Canada.5

The use of concrete water pipes at Ontario was referred to in an
official Victorian report.6 An additional feature was the
establishment of a College of Agriculture.  Ontario followed the
example of Riverside by concentration on fruit production from small
holdings.

The success of Ontario became known to Australians visiting USA in
1885 to gain information for the Victorian Royal Commission on Water
Supply.7 Alfred Deakin, chairman of the Commission, had been advised
while in San Francisco to look at irrigation colonies in southern
California.  At Los Angeles Deakin together with two Melbourne
journalists met George Chaffey, at Ontario 35 miles distant there was
William Chaffey to show them around the settlement, and at Riverside
Alfred Deakin dined with Luther Holt, whose idea of a mutual water
company had been used with advantage for the Chaffey colonies.

\section{From California to Australia}

An off-hand suggestion at the Ontario colony by one of the Melbourne
journalists to William Chaffey that the brothers might do well in
Australia is the basis for claims that they were invited to develop
irrigation there.8 George and W.\,B.~Chaffey independently were
tempted by the prospects in Australia and there was less reason for
remaining in California after the death of their father in 1884.  Even
before Deakin's visit to California, George had been influenced by
advice from a much-travelled Englishman, Stephen Cureton, who had
spent several months in Australia and claimed that land for irrigation
could be acquired there cheaply.  The brothers decided to send him to
Australia as their agent.  He reached Melbourne in the spring of 1885.

A diary kept by Deakin indicates that Cureton called on him early in
October 1885 and had several meetings with him over three months.9
Stephen Cureton, born June 1845 in Shropshire, England, gained
prominence in Victoria from his close association with the Chaffey
brothers.  Initially he was accepted in Victoria as an authority on
irrigation and horticulture, giving evidence to two royal commissions
and a public lecture later at Shepparton. He soon advised George
Chaffey to travel to Melbourne.

George Chaffey reached Victoria on 13 February 1886 and began a series
of meetings with Alfred Deakin, then Minister for Water Supply, whose
diary shows that they stretched over three months.10 Chaffey sought a
substantial grant of land on which to develop irrigation as in
California; Deakin knew the obstacles to land grants for such a
purpose but was optimistic that a deal could be arranged.  George
Chaffey was sufficiently certain of the outcome to cable his brother,
advising him to come to Australia and authorising him to sell their
Californian assets.  The Chaffeys sold their Californian assets in
March 1886, possibly for the assessed value of \$310,000
(\pounds62,000) reported for Ontario in 1886; their expenditure to mid
1884 was given as \$238,500 (\pounds47,700).11

\section{Mildura chosen for irrigation}

Deakin advised George Chaffey to become familiar with the Murray
valley.  He travelled to Echuca and downstream as far as the Kulkyne
pastoral station in the mallee country.12 There he learnt that the
Mildura station, not far distant to the northwest, might be suitable
for irrigation.  It is unlikely that this was his first information on
Mildura as Cureton had apparently called there on a trip by steamer
down the Murray during his earlier visit to Australia.  The extensive
pastoral station or run known as Mildura embraced approximately
64,000\,ac and had been occupied for many years by the Jamieson
brothers, who until 1878 grazed thousands of sheep on its grassy
country near the river and in the adjacent mallee scrub.13 Their
homestead by the river was known to many travellers along that stream
who were attracted by its garden and orchard irrigated from the river.
Rabbits began infesting the district by 1878 and so reduced the
capacity of the current landholder, the Tapalin Pastoral Company, to
graze livestock that it became insolvent and the Commercial Bank of
Adelaide, its main creditor, crashed in February 1886.14

After returning to Melbourne and consulting Deakin about Mildura,
George Chaffey apparently travelled to Adelaide and then proceeded by
train and paddle steamer to Wentworth, the busy port at the junction
of the Darling and Murray Rivers and only 15 miles from the Mildura
homestead.15 George Chaffey met William Paterson, manager of the
Mildura station, at Wentworth and asked to be shown that pastoral run.
Paterson agreed only after Chaffey produced a letter from a bank
manager seeking payment from the station lessee and identifying
Chaffey as a probable buyer of the station.  George Chaffey spent at
least three autumn days at Mildura examining pine-covered sandhills,
plains covered with mallee eucalypts and bluebush, and flats near the
river covered with box eucalypts.  He looked at the soils and
subsoils, enquired about the rise and fall of the river and the
features of a particular billabong, and even got the use of a
theodolite to find the height of land above the river.  The visitor
was convinced of the suitability of this country for irrigation and
told the bewildered manager of his intention to buy the place.  All
this was told later by Paterson to Price Fletcher ('Jethro Tull'), the
agricultural journalist of a Queensland newspaper.16

The timing and circumstances of these inspections by George Chaffey of
land near the River Murray in Victoria and South Australia are
uncertain in view of Deakin's relevant diary entries for 1886 which do
not indicate the appropriate long intervals between
appointments.  These show:
\begin{tabbing}
        12345679012345\=123456789012345\kill
	14 February \> George Chaffey\\
	17 February \> Chaffey\\
	10 March    \> Chaffey back\\
	19 March    \> Chaffey \\
	22 March    \> Chaffey's proposal \\
	29 March    \> Chaffey \\
	 1 April    \> Chaffey \pounds500 \\
	15 April    \> Chaffey \\
	22 April    \> Chaffey \\
	23 December \> Chaffeys \\
	24 December \> Chaffeys.17\\
\end{tabbing}
The interval of almost three weeks before 10 March should have given
time for Chaffey's inspection along the river from Echuca as far as
Kulkyne and his return to Melbourne, in which case a return visit to
Mildura via Adelaide during the first fortnight in April is
problematic considering that the Melbourne to Adelaide railway was
then incomplete.18

\section{Negotiations for the Mildura project}

After his visit to Mildura, Chaffey started discussions with Deakin
about transferring the Mildura land to the firm of Chaffey Brothers.
There were many complications arising from the current arrangements
for use of the mallee country in Victoria.  That vast tract of public
or crown land with low rainfall and a dense cover of eucalypt scrub
was divided into many large leasehold blocks held by pastoralists,
several of these made up the Mildura station.  The leases were now
held by the liquidators of the failed Adelaide bank and by some
coincidence the principal liquidator was a prominent South Australian
politician, Thomas Playford.  The only pieces of freehold land in the
region were those which could be bought to include a station homestead
and could not exceed 640\,ac.  There was such a title for the land
including the Mildura homestead on the river.  Any arrangement to
accommodate the Chaffey request would need to provide compensation for
cancellation of unexpired leases and make new boundaries.

The availability of water for irrigation in this region of low
rainfall and hot summers was another important consideration. Records
of the river level were available for Mildura; and monthly changes in
the volume of river water for the past 20 years were known for the
upstream port of Echuca.  The Chaffeys expected to follow their
Californian procedure of irrigating fruit trees and vines, which
needed abundant water in the hot dry summer, a time of reduced river
flow.  As a result of conferences in 1885 between the appropriate
royal commissions in Victoria and New South Wales, it was expected
that although the River Murray does not lie in Victoria its waters
would be divided equally between the two colonies.  That arrangement
would have been prejudicial to South Australian interests in river
traffic, so the fact that a prominent South Australian politician was
now in control of the Mildura leases meant that the Victorian
government had to be careful in determining how much water the
Chaffeys should be allowed to pump from the river for irrigation.

Another aspect of development at Mildura was transport.  The Victorian
railhead nearest to Mildura was then at Kerang, more than 150 miles
distant by coach.  River transport upstream from Mildura was subject
to interruption when levels dropped in summer and autumn but was then
more reliable downstream thanks to seasonal inflow from the Darling
River at Wentworth.  A railway connection to Melbourne would have
involved laying an additional 160 miles of track across unproductive
mallee country.  Unless this extension was made, the Mildura
irrigation scheme would have to rely mainly on river transport.

Negotiations between Deakin and Chaffey were completed in October
1886, when an announcement was made in the Victorian Parliament during
debate on the Waterworks Construction Encouragement Bill.  Their
agreement provided that under certain conditions the Chaffey Brothers
would receive a grant of 50,000\,ac at Mildura, and the right to
acquire adjoining land, to the extent of 200,000\,ac at a cost of
\pounds2 per~ac.  The main conditions were to establish an irrigation
settlement on the area it was proposed to grant, and to make permanent
improvements on it such as irrigation channels, installation of
pumping equipment, roads and bridges, all involving expenditure to the
extent of \pounds300,000 within 20 years, with specified outlays in
each five-year term.  As expenditure mounted, the Chaffeys would
gradually acquire freehold title to an increasing portion of the
50,000\,ac; this was specified as 1\,ac for each \pounds5 expenditure,
with the limitation that no grant was to be for less than 640\,ac.19
They were also to provide an agricultural college and establish fruit
packing and canning, and the allotments offered for sale were to be no
larger than 80\,ac for horticulture and 160\,ac for agriculture.20 The
Chaffeys were to take water for irrigation from the Murray but only as
authorised by the government.

News of this agreement provoked lively debate on the Bill in
parliament, continuing long enough to threaten its safe conduct and
thus jeopardise negotiations with the Chaffeys.  Finally, to avoid
defeat, Deakin and the government were obliged to allow tenders to be
called for proposed irrigation at Mildura.  There was promise at this
stage of a rival to the Chaffeys with the announcement that a
Victorian politician was travelling to Britain to seek the necessary
finance. Prospects for the Chaffeys looked bleak when William Chaffey
reached Melbourne late in December 1886.

\section{Starting two settlements}

At this point, the South Australian government took the opportunity of
offering the Chaffeys land by the Murray for irrigation development as
proposed for Mildura.  Land held under pastoral lease as the Bookmark
station near the Victorian border was to be made available to the
Chaffeys, who in January 1887 spent several days together with the
Conservator of Water (J.\,W.~Jones) inspecting land along the Murray
before accepting the offer in February 1887 for an area later known as
Renmark.21 They had chosen land much less elevated above the river
than at Mildura.  It ranged from clays partly subject to flooding to
sandy ground up to 60\,ft above the river and covered with native
pines.  After returning from this part of the colony they soon found
that tenders for the Mildura project had closed without any
submissions.  The Chaffeys were still interested in the Mildura
scheme, as was the Victorian government, so a new arrangement was made
between the parties to ensure the development.  Meanwhile the South
Australian proposal awaited endorsement in a new parliament to be
elected in the coming winter.

Even before the new Victorian agreement known as the Indenture
received vice-regal consent at the end of May, the Chaffeys began work
at Mildura with survey parties.  In the coming winter the work of
clearing and ploughing began with huge steam tractors from England.
They were under the control of a young engineer, Peter McLaren, who
remained in Mildura to become resident engineer for Chaffey Brothers.
It was also time to give serious attention to Renmark as the assent to
the agreement concerning that area had been given.  George Chaffey
took up residence then at Renmark; William Chaffey was occupied mainly
with business affairs in Melbourne leading to establishment of the
firm Chaffey Brothers Ltd in October 1887, its directors being the two
Chaffeys, Stephen Cureton, and William Paterson, the Mildura station
manager.22 A site six miles downstream from the Mildura homestead had
first been selected for the township but it later became known as 'Old
Mildura', and was devoted to irrigation of Lord Ranfurley's orchards
and vineyards.23 This change of plans followed Chaffeys' purchase in
August 1887 of the freehold land associated with the homestead.24 As
clearing and surveys proceeded, the land was divided into blocks for
sale, with access by a gridwork of roads as in their Ontario
settlement in California.  Plans were made for the system of pumps
required to supply water from the river to channels at heights from 50
to 90\,ft above the river in order to supply the higher land south of
the township and the shallow valley or trough to the southwest.25 At
first only two streets in the township were distinguished by personal
names: the spacious main avenue was named for Deakin. and another
along the river frontage was named for Cureton, apparently in honour
of his efforts to establish the settlement.

It might have been expected that the Chaffeys would deliver irrigation
water by piping as they had done at Ontario but the slopes of the land
selected for irrigation at Mildura and Renmark were regarded as
insufficient for gravitation of water through pipes of the style used
by the Chaffeys in California.  However, South Australian patents were
taken out later by the Chaffeys for their composite pipes and pipe
moulds.26 During 1887 plans were completed for the location at Mildura
of pumping stations and the positions of the main irrigation channels.

Meanwhile at Renmark progress had been made since August 1887 with
surveying and clearing about 4,000\,ac of low-lying land near an
effluent of the river.  George Chaffey's move there put him in a good
position to make adequate arrangements for the river transport vital
to the development of both settlements.  His enterprise soon brought
about the formation of the River Murray Navigation Co. Ltd with
possession of steam-boats and the services of Captain Hugh King, an
experienced river-man.27 Subsequently Charles Chaffey, the third
brother, took up residence at Renmark as manager of the project and
remained there for several years.

Irrigation at both sites required centrifugal pumps to lift water from
the river in stages.  At Mildura the supply of water to channels up to
85\,ft above the river would involve four stages; at Renmark three
stages were needed. The initial lift at both places involved pumping
from the river into abandoned channels or effluents which could serve
also as reservoirs.

During 1888 contractors at both settlements made earthen channels
cemented in places to reduce seepage; settlers began planting their
allotments with fruit trees and vines; and some equipment was
installed to pump water from the river. Temporary arrangements allowed
watering of some 80\,ac at Mildura using a centrifugal pump and a
portable engine and limited irrigation was also undertaken at
Renmark.28

At Mildura George Chaffey made use of imported triple-expansion steam
engines coupled with centrifugal pumps; some were delivered in 1888
and the most powerful were made by Tangyes in England to his own
design and supplied in 1889.  Less powerful engines and pumps were
provided at Renmark to cope with the smaller area involved and the
lower lifts.  Generation of steam by boilers at the pump sites
required substantial supplies of local firewood.29 The Mildura
Irrigation Company and the Renmark Irrigation Company, corresponding
to the mutual irrigation companies introduced in California, were
formed in 1888 and 1889 to deal specifically with the supply of
irrigation water.30

Sales of land at the settlements were promoted by imaginative
advertisements and special excursions from Melbourne and Adelaide.
One particularly effective publication was the book entitled `The
Australian Irrigation Colonies', known widely as the Red Book from its
coloured cover.  This appeared in 1888, with a further edition in
1889; many settlers came from Britain in response to its advice on
opportunities to profit from production of oranges, wine, raisins,
olives and fruit from deciduous trees.31

Changes were made during 1888 in the control of the main Chaffey
company.  Stephen Cureton, whose involvement in the irrigation scheme
had been important at its inception, retired as a director of Chaffey
Bros Ltd, took out a large sum of money as his share in the company
assets and was replaced by Jonas Levien (1840--1906), a Victorian
politician with horticultural experience and a reputation for ability
to arrange financial backing for his enterprises.  Levien soon
replaced George Chaffey as chairman of the board of directors.

With the successful testing of the powerful Chaffey pumping engine
early in 1890, George Chaffey completed his major contribution to
irrigation at Mildura. Then troubles developed over management of
irrigation there. W.\,M.~Paterson, the Mildura manager of Chaffey Bros
Ltd and a director of the Mildura Irrigation Co, was replaced as
manager by W.\,J.~Waddingham, a relative of the Chaffeys.32 Paterson
then became involved in local discontent during 1891 and 1892 over
charges to be made by the Irrigation Company: there were claims by
some irrigators that no charges should be made for the supply of
water, and in fact no charges were made for irrigation water before
1890.  The Victorian government appointed A.\,W.~Howitt in 1892 to
make enquiries, received his report upholding a rating system for
Mildura, and subsequently introduced legislation which became the
subject of another enquiry by a Select Committee in 1892.  The outcome
was the Mildura Rating Act.33

Irrigators at Renmark were also concerned about management of the
local irrigation company, then virtually controlled by Chaffey
Brothers.  However, in 1892 after transferring control to the settlers
the Chaffeys contracted to operate the irrigation system.  Next year
the irrigation company was replaced by the Renmark Irrigation Trust.
This was achieved through legislation in 1893 which provided for
management of the trust by a board of seven elected irrigators.34

Despite many difficulties in developing the irrigation colonies,
progress was achieved in the extension of cultivation and the growth
of population.  In 1891 the Chaffeys had sold 17,000\,ac at Mildura
and 4,500\,ac at Renmark; their settlers had planted 6,500\,ac at
Mildura and about 1500\,ac at Renmark; and populations were 4,000 and
600 respectively.  Mildura in 1894 had more than 4000\,ac planted with
fruit trees including apricots, citrus, peaches and olives, less than
3500\,ac with vines mainly for raisins, and 700\,ac with annual or
green crops.35 Renmark in 1895 had 2864\,ac under irrigation with
almost half that area planted with deciduous fruit trees and citrus
and the balance made up almost equally by vines and fodder crops.36

Transport became more of a problem when the settlements reached the
stage of producing goods for sale.  Despite encouraging remarks from
Richard Speight, chairman of the Victorian Railway Commissioners, on
his visit to Mildura in November 1888, nothing had been done to
provide a railway to that settlement and it remained dependent on
river transport.37 This was reliable except during periods of low
river levels and these unfortunately occurred in several years during
summer and autumn when fresh fruit awaited transport to markets.38
George Chaffey tried to cope with the problem of low river levels by
importing an American boat, the stern-wheel steamer Pearl, with low
draft but it was not a success.39 The rail connection to Melbourne was
not achieved until late in 1903.  Renmark was better placed except in
exceptional droughts such as that of 1914 when the river virtually
dried up.  Citrus growers had more success: in June 1892 the first
exports to England were made, and in 1893 hundreds of cases of oranges
and lemons reached England and America.40 In order to cope with
marketing stone fruit and vine fruits it was necessary to resort to
drying and success with this process firmly established the dried
fruit industry in the two irrigation settlements.

\section{Waterlogging and salinity}

After irrigation was provided for the orchards and vineyards, many
settlers became aware of unexpected problems associated with
watering. The unlined earthen channels were subject to seepage or even
collapse after burrowing by freshwater crayfish('yabbies') introduced
from the river. This loss of water added to the expense of pumping
from the river and it also involved damage to fruit trees and vines
from waterlogging and salinity. Seepage was detected at Mildura in
1892 when it extended 200\,ft from the banks of certain channels.41 At
Renmark the loss from supply channels was estimated at 20 per cent
before 1895 while at Mildura where the length of main channels
exceeded 100 miles in 1892, the loss was reported to be more than
half.42 Seepage from channels can be reduced or averted by lining the
earthen structures with impermeable material such as concrete.

Excessive salinity in the soil was recognised soon after irrigation at
Mildura and Renmark. This feature might have been anticipated from
soil analyses and it is possible that the Chaffeys had relevant
information when they expressed their interest in soils during an
interview, probably in 1887
\begin{quote}
	we have had analyses made of the soil and compared them with
	the results of analyses made of soil from
	successfully-irrigated colonies in America.43
\end{quote}
George Chaffey told the Victorian Select Committee on Mildura in 1892
that he examined the soils before irrigation channels were made and
found there was an `immense quantity of alkalis' which were `not
injurious to plant life'.44

The first indication that salinity could be a disadvantage to
Australian irrigators came soon after irrigation at Mildura in 1888.
Land had been cleared and cultivated in 1887 and in 1888 irrigation
was begun though only 120\,ac had been planted.45 In February 1889
four men from the Western Wimmera Irrigation Trust visited Mildura and
reported the existence of a white salty crust on land that had been
watered.46 A few years later there was more definite evidence that
salinity was a problem for irrigators at Mildura. James Henshilwood
had taken up a block of 40\,ac on land previously covered by mallee
vegetation.  He had planted fruit trees of various types in 1890.  In
the next two years some trees failed to make satisfactory growth and
were replaced.  Samples of his soil were sent to Melbourne for
analysis, which showed that one contained `a great excess of salt'.
He was advised to install deep open drains and wash out the salt.  He
had further trouble with citrus though stone fruit did better.
Apparently uncertain of the diagnosis given by the Melbourne analyst,
Henshilwood wrote to Professor Hilgard in California in 1895 for
advice on treatment of his soil.  Hilgard's reply was directed to
finding if the soil also had a problem of alkalinity and asked for
samples of soil.  When these were sent in 1895, the results of
analysis showed no alkalinity and the very low concentration of salt
could be explained as the result of the high rainfall (30\,in) in that
year.47

Before 1900 settlers at Mildura and Renmark were familiar with the
appearance of waterlogging, seepage, and the effects of soil salinity
or alkalinity, all having some ill effects on fruit trees and
vines.  The Chaffey brothers apparently had no experience of these
problems in their Californian settlements, but Professor Hilgard's
advice on under-drainage of Californian soils affected by salinity or
alkalinity after irrigation was taken up there by several
landholders.  By 1907 individual landholders at Mildura had installed
tile drains which discharged via shafts or bores to underlying beds of
sand at depths of 80 to 90\,ft.48 This method was less reliable at
Renmark.49

\section{Chaffey Bros Ltd becomes insolvent}

While various technical and administrative problems of the two
settlements were being dealt with, a major financial crisis for the
Chaffeys was looming.  Much of their success had occurred during the
prosperity enjoyed in Victoria in the late 1880s following British
investments.  But in the eight months from July 1891 twenty major
financial institutions closed and British investments were
curtailed.50 The Chaffeys tried to avoid involvement by making
personal appearances in England to raise funds but failed after
reports were circulated there of the difficulties confronting settlers
in the irrigation colonies.  There was worse to come in 1893 when
banks in Melbourne suspended trading and the boom collapsed.  Some
settlers left Mildura and Renmark, seeking work even as far away as
the new goldfields in Western Australia.  Then Chaffey Bros Ltd went
into liquidation in 1895 and legislation was passed enabling the
establishment of the First Mildura Irrigation Trust with board members
elected by settlers in much the same way as for the Renmark Irrigation
Trust.  A few months later a Royal Commission was appointed to enquire
into circumstances of the Mildura settlement.51 It was followed in
South Australia by a similar enquiry concerning Renmark and other
settlements along the river.

The report of the Victorian royal commission found the Chaffeys and
the Victorian government had contributed to the debacle at Mildura.52
Many witnesses, including George Chaffey, Alfred Deakin, and Stephen
Cureton had been called to give evidence before the commissioners.
They found that several provisions of the indenture of May 1887 had
not been met, though these deficiencies did not include the
expenditures of money required to obtain the crown grants of land.
The enquiry gave attention particularly to the arrangements for
irrigation, which were then in a critical state; as a result
recommendations were made in favour of a loan to ensure the lining of
existing channels, to improve the pumping plant and to make sure of a
water supply during the coming irrigation season.

One outcome of the debacle involving the Chaffey irrigation colonies
on the Murray was the return of George Chaffey to America after his
financial ruin and criticism of his irrigation development.  An
extensive defence of his work was given much later by his
biographer.53 W.\,B.~Chaffey remained a respected figure at Mildura
where his fortunes gradually improved.

The South Australian enquiry took evidence from many Renmark settlers
and some members of the managerial staff, with general agreement that
serious seepage from unlined earthen channels had occurred.
Recommendations in the progress report of 1899 were concerned mainly
with maintenance of the water supply channels, including provision of
funds for the purpose.54

Improvements in the irrigation systems of the settlements were made
after the two irrigation trusts became responsible, but there were
recurrent difficulties with water supplies when the river flow was
seriously diminished in periods of drought.  Some future improvement
in water supplies from the river was indicated when the Commonwealth
and three States reached agreement in 1915 on management of the river
by provision of weirs and locks and construction of storages.

Despite the reduction in seepage losses from channels as their lining
with cement extended, waterlogging due to irrigation forced many
settlers to develop individual drainage systems.  The horticultural
industry continued to be based on production of dried fruit, which
gave good financial returns during the 1914--18 war.  Plantings of
wine grapevines began early in the development of the irrigation
colonies and led to establishment of wineries and distilleries at
Mildura and Renmark.55

\section{Conclusions}

The Mildura and Renmark colonies transferred much of the Californian
methods of irrigation for establishment of horticulture and
viticulture in a region regarded previously by many Australians as
almost unproductive.  The venture by the Chaffeys captured popular
attention at a time of prosperity but almost collapsed ten years after
it began.  The Chaffeys followed the same procedure as they had used
for promotion of their earlier settlements in California but their
Australian ventures were more ambitious and lacked the access to
reliable transport and extensive markets that enabled their earlier
ventures to flourish.  George and W.\,B.~Chaffey were an impressive
pair but they took on responsibilities beyond their capacity to
maintain.  When the major engineering problems of the two irrigation
settlements had been attended to, George was tempted by the scope for
irrigation in other parts of Australia and W.\,B.~Chaffey had to spend
time abroad after personal tragedy.  Management of affairs at Renmark
was handled successfully for a time by the youngest brother, Charles,
while serious problems at Mildura were proving beyond the capacity of
new managers there.

A basic problem of these ventures was that financing development
depended largely on sales of land.  This method succeeded initially
but could not cope with problems encountered early in the 1890s when
sales declined.

The lack of reliable transport to Mildura was a serious disadvantage
which forced dependence on production of dried or canned fruit but the
Chaffeys failed to develop a canning facility there.  Apart from a few
Americans brought to Mildura and Renmark by the Chaffeys, the settlers
had no prior experience of irrigation.

\section{References}

1. O.O.Winther, The Colony System Of Southern California, Agric.History, 
     1953, vol.27, pp. 94-102.

2. D.G.Harris, Irrigation In India, 1923, London.

3. T.Patterson, A Colony For California, Riverside's First Hundred Years, 
     1971.

4. E.Mead, Rise And Future Of Irrigation In The United States, p. 591 in 
     USDA Yearbook of Agriculture 1899, Washington USA 1900.

5. J.A.Alexander, The Life Of George Chaffey, 1928, \& R.L.Gentilcore, 
    Agric.History, 1960, vol.34,p.77-87.

6. VicPP No. 19A of 1885. R.C.Water Supply, Further Progress Rept. \&
     J.E.M.Vincent, The Australian Irrigation Colonies On The River Murray In 
     Victoria And South Australia, 1889, p.101.

7. VicPP No. 19 of 1885, R.C.Water Supply.

8. J.A.Alexander, 1928, p.91.

9. Diary 1885, Deakin papers 1540/2/4, NL.

10. J.A.Alexander, 1928, p.101, \& Diary 1886, Deakin papers 1540/2/5 NL.

11. J.A.Alexander, 1928,p.98, R.L.Gentilcore 1960, \&
      J.E.M.Vincent,1889, p.98, re equivalence of US\$5 to \pounds1.

12. J.A.Alexander, p.108.

13. J.A.Alexander, p.109, \& A.S.Kenyon, The Story Of The Mallee, Vict.Hist 
     Mag. 1914-1915.

14. S.Wells, Paddle Steamers To Cornucopia, The Renmark-Mildura 
       Experiment of 1887, 1986, p.40.

15. J.A.Alexander, 1928, p.108.

16. Queenslander, 1/11/1890.

17. Diary 1886, Deakin Papers 1540/2/5, NL.

18. L.J.Blake, The Land Of The Lowan, 100 Years In Nhill And West 
     Wimmera, 1976, p.100.

19. J.A.Alexander, 1928, p.118.

20. J.A.Alexander, 1928, p.119.

21. Kapunda Herald, 18/1/1887 \&  S.Wells,1986, pp. 48-49,65.

22. S.Wells, 1986, p.118.

23. S.Wells, 1986, p.69.

24. S.Wells, 1986, p.56.

25. B.E.Butler, Aeolian Landscape Materials And Forms: Examples From The
      Mildura Region. , p.40, in Aeolian Landscapes In The Semi-arid Zone Of
      South-Eastern Australia. Procs Mildura Conf. 1979, 1980, Wagga Wagga.   

26. D.A.Cumming and G.Moxham, They Built South Australia, p.35,1986, 
      Adelaide.

27. S.Wells, 1986,pp84-86.

28. J.E.M.Vincent, The Australian Irrigation Colonies, 1889, p.127.

29. S.Wells, 1986, pp114-115.

30. S.Wells, 1986, p.127.

31. J.E.M.Vincent, The Australian Irrigation Colonies 1889. 

32. S.Wells, 1986, p.150-51.

33. VicPP 1892-93. V.\&P LA Vol.1 2nd Sess., Rept Select Comm.
      LA upon the Mildura Settlement \& S.Wells, 1986, pp 143-44.

34. S.Wells, 1986, p.149

35. CSIR Bulletin 133, A Soil Survey Of The Mildura Irrigation Settlement,
      1940, \& S. Murray, Irrigation In Victoria, 1892 p.6.

36. S.Wells, 1986, p.157.

37. J.E.M.Vincent, 1889, p.120.

38. S.Wells, 1986, p.265.

39. S.Wells, 1986, p.88-89.

40. Ernestine Hill, Water Into Gold, 1937, p.125.

41. J.A.Alexander, 1928, p.198.

42. SAPP No. 113 of 1895. Select Committee Village Settlements etc. Rept.
      \&  VictPP No.19 of 1896, R.C.Mildura, Rept. p.vi.

43.  J.E.M.Vincent, 1889, p.98 quotation from Melbourne Argus.

44. VicPP V \& P LA Vol.1, 1892-93, 2nd sess. Select Comm. 
       Mildura Settlement. Rept. \& MoE, Q818-819.

45. S.Wells, 1986, p.73.

46. Silenus(A.S.Kenyon),Early Mildura As Others Saw It. Sunraysia Daily,
      19/8/1921.

47. VicPP No.19 of 1896, R.C.Mildura, Appendix A2,pp. 277-279.

48. A.S.Kenyon, Drainage And Irrigation, J.Agric.Vict. 1907, vol.5, 206, \&         .     CSIR Bull. No.133, 1940, Soil Survey Of The Mildura Irrigation 
      Settlement.

49. CSIR Bull. No.56, Soil Survey of . . . . Renmark Irrigation District, South 
       Australia.

50. M.Cannon, The Land Boomers, 1986, p.26.

51. M.Cannon, 1986, p.81.

52. VicPP No.19 of 1896, R.C.Mildura, Rept.

53. J.A.Alexander, 1928.

54. SAPP No. 37 of 1899, R.C.Renmark and Murray River Settlements,
      Progress Rept and MoE.

55. S.Wells, 1986, pp 123 \& 236.
