% $Id$
% CHAPTER TEN
% 6160 words at 2/5/99

\setcounter{endnote}{0}

\chapter{Proposals for Other Irrigation Colonies}
\label{ch:proposals}\addtoendnotes{\protect\section*{Chapter \thechapter}}
\markboth{
\textsc{Chapter \thechapter. Proposals for Other Colonies}
}{
}

More than twenty irrigation colonies were proposed in Victoria, New
South Wales and South Australia, generally in response to progress
with those at Mildura and Rermark.  They were all initiated by private
companies which had to rely on governments or semi-governmental bodies
for access to a water supply. With one exception, the following
schemes were proposed in a period of about ten years from 1884.  Eight
colonies, all in Victoria, were the only ones to come into existence
and survive after 1920.

\section*{Murray Valley}

\subsection*{Morgan, SA}

Frederick Ludwig Bevilaqua (1832--1913) came to South Australia from
Germany in 1854 and for many years was a trader in the South-East and
the Barossa Valley.  His interest in irrigation at first in the 1860s
went as far as an unsuccessful attempt to use water from the Murray
River near Mannum.  In 1884 he launched his proposal for an irrigation
settlement near Morgan to be developed by the South Australian
Irrigation Company on 25\,000\,ac, part of which was to be subdivided
into holdings of 50 to 100\,ac irrigated from the Murray by means of
pumps.  The chosen area was approved by George Goyder,
Surveyor-General, and endorsed by John Custance, Professor of
Agriculture at the recently established Roseworthy Agricultural
College.  Bevilaqua was aware of contemporary interest in irrigation
as expressed in Victoria by the Australian Irrigationist and the
newspaper reports of American irrigation provided by
T.\,K.~Dow.\fn{F.~Bevilaqua, \textsl{General Remarks and Detail
Accounts of the South Australian Irrigation Company}, 1884.}  However,
despite further enquiries, nothing came of Bevilaqua's
proposal.\fn{SAPP no.\,158 of 1884 \& SAPP no.\,73 of 1885.}

\subsection*{Lake Bonney, SA}

Lake Bonney, maintained by inflow from the Murray River, lies about 20
miles west of Renmark.  It was mentioned in a scheme for irrigation
proposed in 1888 by business men in Melbourne and Adelaide.  They
sought the use of 150\,000\,ac of land, then held under pastoral lease
on the Cobdogla pastoral station.  The group, soon identified as the
Lake Bonney Irrigation Company, began negotiations with South
Australian government officials in May 1888 and arranged surveys to
determine levels and the possible location of irrigation
channels.\fn{Adelaide Observer 22 Sep.\ 1888 \& 29 Sep.\ 1888.}  Their
application went to the South Australian government and was publicised
in the Adelaide press, with some expressions of opposition from those
preferring development by the government rather than a company.  It
was intended that the company would spend \pounds400\,000 on the
scheme over 20 years.  The application was considered by the South
Australian parliament during September and October but was not agreed
to.  One stumbling block was the government's refusal to allow
subdivision of the irrigable land into lots of 1000\,ac or
more.\fn{SAPD 1888, p.\,1267, 9 Oct.\ 1888.}

One of the promoters was Jonas Levien who had horticultural interests
at Geelong and had been Minister for Mines and Agriculture before
opposing the Mildura agreement submitted by Deakin to the Victorian
Parliament in 1886.  Two others, Benjamin Fink and R.\,W.~Best, were
prominent in the Victorian land boom.\fn{M.~Cannon, \textsl{The Land
Boomers}, 1986.}  It is surprising that Jonas Levien was so involved
with this scheme yet in August 1888, during the period of negotiations
with the SA government by the Lake Bonney Irrigation Company, he
became chairman of the board of directors of Chaffey Bros Ltd., whose
interests he had contested previously.

Irrigation of at least part of the land near Lake Bonney was
sufficiently practicable and attractive to warrant further interest,
leading to important development in the district thirty years later.

\subsection*{Milang, SA}

Albert Henry Landseer was engaged in trade along the Murray River from
his headquarters at Milang on Lake Alexandrina.\fn{A.\,J.~Stimson, ADB
vol.\,9, p.\,655.}  He promoted an irrigation scheme close to Milang,
to be supplied with water pumped from the lake to an area of more than
15\,000\,ac.\fn{Southern Argus, 5 May 1892.}  The area was inspected
in May 1892 by Professor Lowrie of Roseworthy College who regarded the
land as third-rate in quality and advised that only a small scheme
should be tried initially.\fn{Southern Argus, 23 June 1892.}  In July
a parliamentary delegation including two government ministers
inspected the land under consideration and the short-lived Holder
government was apparently in favour of a trial for the
scheme.\fn{Southern Argus, 20 Oct.\ 1892.}  Nothing came of this
scheme but interest in local irrigation was revived in 1893 when an
English syndicate was reported to be negotiating for irrigation of
2000\,ac of land close to Milang.\fn{Southern Argus, 2 Feb.\ 1893,
\& J.~Faull, \textsl{Alexandrina's Shore, A History of the Milang District},
1981.} This project also came to nothing.

\subsection*{Reedy Creek, SA}

An irrigation project proposed in 1888 by J.\,D.~Derry, C.\,N.~Long,
and W.\,R.~Sando involved a storage reservoir with a capacity of
17\,000\,acre-foot to impound the waters of Reedy Creek, which
discharges into the Murray near Mannum, and construction of
distribution channels for irrigation of 20\,000\,ac in the Mannum
Irrigation Colony.  The promoters expected to spend \pounds80\,000 on
construction.  Their application was mentioned in the 1890 report on
South Australian public works; some details of the scheme were
provided later by Alfred Deakin.\fn{SAPP no.\,29 of 1890, A.~Deakin,
\textsl{Irrigation in Australia}, 1892, p.\,92.}  Two years later two
of the promoters had withdrawn leaving the project entirely to
J.\,D.~Derry, the Victorian engineer involved with irrigation near
Horsham, but nothing eventuated before Derry's return to England in
1894.\fn{SAPP no.\,29 of 1892, L.\,J.~Blake, ADB vol.\,4,
pp.\,58--59.}

\subsection*{Lake Boga Irrigation Company, Vic.}

Lake Boga is one of the larger freshwater lakes fed by overflow of the
Murray River along the Little Murray River in northwestern Victoria.
The Lake Boga Irrigation Co.\ was concerned with development of
irrigated horticulture on land close to Lake Boga and the nearby
smaller Long Lake, between which the railway had been extended from
Kerang to Swan Hill in 1889.\fn{S.~Wells, \textsl{Paddle Steamers to
Cornucopia}, 1986, p.\,77.}  Water for irrigation was to be pumped
from the lakes.

The scheme for irrigation was advertised in at least two district
newspapers and a Melbourne weekly in 1890 after formation of the
company.  Its prospectus showed an intention to sell township
allotments (20), horticultural allotments (135) ranging in size from 5
to 12\,ac and totalling 600\,ac, as well as an area of 106\,sq~miles
to the south and west held under mallee pastoral lease.\fn{G.~Gordon
papers, File H17329, LaTL.}  Six men responsible for the project
included three from St Arnaud, and one each from Ballarat, Melbourne,
and Torrumbarry.  Three were engineers, including George Gordon,
formerly of the Victorian Water Supply Department.  Excursions to the
area from Donald were advertised in November 1890, after earlier
efforts to sell allotments by auction.  One advertisement stressed the
accessibility of the project area, with disparaging reference to the
Mildura irrigation settlement as `remote and outlandish'.\fn{Swan Hill
Guardian 19 Nov.\ 1890.}

By 1892 the company had sold 7590\,ac, mainly for dryfarming and
without much progress in selling the irrigable blocks.\fn{G.~Gordon
papers, File H17329, LaTL.}  The company continued in existence for at
least 10 more years but it failed to make any significant development
of irrigation.  Its difficulty arose partly from the refusal of the
Water Supply Department to allow pumping from Lake Boga, a decision
apparently prompted by government support for the Mildura
scheme.\fn{N.~Barr \& J.~Cary, \textsl{Greening a Brown Land}, 1992,
p.\,262.}  This attempt at irrigation in the vicinity of Lake Boga may
have influenced a later effort there by another company.

\subsection*{Tresco, Vic.}

Irrigation at Tresco was promoted in 1913 by Australian Farms Ltd, a
company recently set up to establish farms in different parts of
Australia and New Zealand.  Its foundation directors were mainly
Victorian graziers, and it had the services of R.\,V.~Billis, formerly
a public servant dealing with projects for closer settlement and
immigration.

The company first developed irrigation at the margin of the riverine
tract between Kerang and Swan Hill.  A large area of wheat-farming
land adjacent to the Swan Hill railway line was purchased from a local
resident (Mr~Cornish) and a scheme was promoted for irrigation of
fruit trees and vines on about 4000\,ac divided into small allotments,
with water to be pumped from Lake Boga, filled by overflow from the
Murray River.  Sales of land in this area known as Tresco were
enhanced by the scope for speculators to purchase land without being
obliged to reside there.\fn{N.~Barr \& J.~Cary, 1992. p.\,328.}
Encouraged by the response, the company acquired more land, firstly an
estate adjoining the southern part of Tresco and known as Mystic Park,
and in 1919 land to the west of Tresco, known as Tresco West.  Tresco
Irrigation Ltd was the company which took over the plant belonging to
Australian Farms Ltd at Lake Boga and Tresco; it was the body which
had to deal with the problem of salinity which emerged by 1920.

The settlement suffered its first setback from salinity about five
years after its establishment in 1913.  Citrus and vines had been
planted over about 2500\,ac, including two ridges with sandy topsoil
and extensive flats with loamy soils.\fn{F.\,M.~Read, J.\,Agric.\
Vic.\ 1931 vol.\,29, p.\,551.}  Salt damage first became evident on
the flats after a water-table developed close to the surface and salt
incrustations were noticed on the surface of the
ground.\fn{F.\,M.~Read, J.\,Agric.\ Vic.\ 1930, vol.\,28,p.\,65.}
Drains were installed but their outfall to Lake Boga probably added to
the salt content of its water, which was apparently excessive before
1920.\fn{F.\,M.~Read, 1931, p.\,563.} The damage extended to all the
flat land; satisfactory citrus orchards remained only on the high
sandy ridges.

The Tresco settlement had attracted investment by several men
prominent in public affairs.  They found results at Tresco so
disappointing that in 1920 they looked for an alternative site for
irrigation development and chose land to the west of Kangaroo Lake,
south of the Mystic Park area.\fn{A.~Trengrove, \textsl{John Grey
Gorton}, 1969.}

\subsection*{Torrumbarry North, Vic.}

An area of almost 20\,000\,ac near the Murray River between Echuca and
Kerang was acquired by a company in 1888 with the intention of
subdivision into small holdings to be irrigated for
fruit-growing.\fn{VicPP nos.\,20 \& 21 of 1896, RC~Water Supply,
Rept pp.\,176--180 \& MoE p.\,438.}  Negotiation with the Government
led to the constitution in March 1889 of the Torrumbarry North
Irrigation Trust which was granted by the government a loan of
\pounds12\,300, spent on machinery and an engine house.  The company
first involved with the scheme went into liquidation, apparently after
the collapse of the Victorian land boom, and the trust recorded
irrigation only in 1891, of 17\,ac under fruit trees and
vines.\fn{VicPP no.\,20 of 1896, Rept pp.\,176--180 \& Appendix~C.}
In 1896 the irrigation trust was practically non-existent and the land
was owned by the Murray River Irrigation Estate Co.\ Ltd.\fn{VicPP
no.\,21 of 1896, MoE p.\,438}

\section*{Goulburn River Valley}

\subsection*{Ardmona, Vic.}

The Ardmona irrigation settlement was the first established in the
valley of the Goulburn River, the major Victorian tributary of the
Murray.  Its development took place on small holdings formed over a
period of years by successive subdivision of larger holdings.  Ardmona
was the name given to one of these holdings by its owners, G.~and
L.~McDonald, who came to the district along with many other settlers.
Cereal growing was undertaken with reasonable harvests in the 1870s
but droughts in the early 80s caused hardship.  Adequate supplies of
water were needed but settlers had to depend on wells or cartage from
the Goulburn River.  Legislation in 1881 providing for establishment
of waterworks trusts facilitated a scheme for distribution of river
water by open channels to the many farms in the region lying between
the Goulburn, the Campaspe, and the Murray Rivers.  The principal aim
of the scheme was to provide water for stock and domestic purposes;
irrigation was a minor consideration.  A weir on the Goulburn would be
needed to divert water into the channel system and its construction,
under consideration from 1884, was started in 1887 and did not provide
water for irrigation until the spring of 1891.\fn{W.\,H.~Bossence,
\textsl{Murchison}, 1965, pp.\,105--106.} Meanwhile a pumping plant
was installed and began operation in September 1885 to supply water to
the distribution channels then completed.\fn{Aqua, Nov.\ 1968,
p.\,53.}

A few landholders near Mooroopna on the west bank of the Goulburn were
interested in horticulture and viticulture before water supplies
became available.  They together took steps to create small holdings
intended for fruit and vines.  Portion of W.~Davis's farm was acquired
by Fred J.~Young, a local farmer since 1870, who subdivided it in 1886
to provide five allotments varying in size from 8 to 30\,ac. One was
bought by John West, editor since 1883 of the local paper, Goulburn
Valley Yeoman.\fn{Margaret Steven, ADB vol.\,12, 1990, p.\,445.}  An
adjoining farm of 733\,ac, known as Ardmona, was purchased in 1886 by
five members of a syndicate: West, Michael Kavanagh, Fred Young,
M.~Cussen, and A.\,B.~Patterson, with the intention of
subdivision.\fn{C.\,S.~Martin, \textsl{Irrigation and Closer
Settlement in the Shepparton District 1836--1905}, 1955, pp.\,57--58.}
Then George Pagan bought an adjoining property of 329\,ac for
subdivision and began selling allotments a few years later.

Vines and fruit trees planted earlier by Michael Kavanagh, a Canadian,
on his `Lake Erie' farm near Ardmona, and by Fred Young, produced
grapes for wine or raisins and currants as well as fresh fruit for
sale.  John West began a plant nursery and orchard on his block.  All
three were able to continue production without irrigation but they
were ready to make use of it when water became available in 1886.  In
that year the rainfall in the district was low in autumn but otherwise
normal (18.6\,in at Shepparton) and in 1887 rains were more than
adequate (26.3\,in).  The next year brought a drought and there was
insufficient water to allow irrigation.  Despite that handicap, John
West gained first prize in the government competition for the best
variety of irrigated crops,. His farm, named Milvina, was reported as
being a portion of `Fresno' colony.\fn{Australasian, 18 Feb.\ 1888,
p.\,354.}

In 1890 the Minister for Water Supply, Alfred Deakin announced the
Cabinet decision to appoint John West as an expert with practical
knowledge of irrigation to teach farmers; he was sent to California
and Colorado for several months to study irrigation
methods.\fn{Goulburn Valley Yeoman, 2 May 1890.}  On return to
Victoria he gave a number of lectures on irrigation at towns in the
Goulburn Valley.

The extent of irrigation at Ardmona was reported as about 300\,ac in
1892; it increased gradually later and involved 4000\,ac by
1916.\fn{S.~Murray, \textsl{Irrigation in Victoria}, 1892, \&
Dept.\ Agric.\ Vic.\ Tech.\ Bull.\ no.\,3, 1944.}

\subsection*{Eshcol, Vic.}

The Eshcol irrigation settlement was promoted by J.\,B.~Campbell who
in 1894 issued a colourful prospectus indicating that the village of
Eshcol would include a cannery, creamery, and drying houses, as well
as a library, school, and post office.  The proposed location was to
be west of Ardmona and 3 miles north of Tatura but there is no
evidence that such an irrigation settlement was ever
achieved.\fn{W.\,H.~Bossence, \textsl{Tatura and the Shire of Rodney},
1969.}

\subsection*{Mount Scobie, Vic.}

Mount Scobie, a solitary hill south of Kyabram in the Goulburn Valley
was the name given to an estate of 9000\,ac bought for \pounds90\,000
by James Mirams, former politician turned land agent.\fn{M.~Cannon,
\textsl{The Land Boomers}, 1986, p.\,150.}  Mirams advertised allotments
for sale in 1890 as the Mt Scobie irrigation colony, with minimum
holdings of 10\,ac.\fn{Australasian, 1 Mar.\ 1890.}  Later in the
year, Mirams, a prominent figure in the Victorian land boom, was
convicted of issuing a false balance sheet for a business and was
sentenced to a year's imprisonment.\fn{S.\,M.~Ingham, ADB, vol.\,5,
1974, p.\,258.}  Though some blocks of land were apparently sold at
Mount Scobie, there is no evidence that an irrigation colony was
realised there.

\subsection*{Mooroopna Irrigation Company, Vic.}

An article published in 1890 referred to the Mooroopna irrigation
colony three miles north of Ardmona and mentioned the involvement of
John West, Michael Kavanagh, M.~Cussen, W.Burnett, and Strachan~\&
Co.\fn{Australasian, 8 Nov.\ 1890, p.\,878.}  This followed an
advertisement in the same paper for the Mooroopna Irrigable Lands
Investment Co.\ Ltd.\fn{Australasian, 25 Oct.\ 1890.}  The outcome of
this venture is not clear; it may have become part of the Ardmona
settlement.

\section*{Campaspe River Valley}

\subsection*{Echuca Irrigation and Freehold Land Company, Vic.}

Efforts to develop irrigation near the downstream course of the
Campaspe River, west of Echuca, began in 1888--89 when a group of
investors arranged to buy three pastoral properties---Restdown,
Marathon, and Wharparilla---with a combined area of almost
40\,000\,ac.\fn{VicPP no.\,21 of 1896, RC~Water Supply, MoE,
p.\,436.}

James Shackell, prominent in Echuca as an auctioneer and politician,
took a leading part in the scheme to irrigate that land.  He had been
a member of the 1884 royal commission on water supply and knew of the
possibility of bringing irrigation water to the area as indicated by
Gordon and Black in their second report on irrigation.\fn{G.~Gordon \&
A.~Black, Second Report on Irrigation, 1884.}  The Millewa Irrigation
Trust was formed in 1890 to undertake irrigation on approximately
31\,000\,ac of the land purchased by the investment company.  When the
affairs of the trust were examined by the 1896 royal commission on
water supply, Shackell stated that the scheme, involving the formation
of an irrigation colony, relied on the expectation of getting gravity
water `from the Goulburn channel that was to be constructed at the
expense of the government and deemed to be national works'.\fn{VicPP
no.\,21 RC~Water Supply, MoE p.\,436.}

The scheme was in jeopardy, however, when the purchase of land by the
investment company could not be completed and Shackell went to London
to arrange alternative finance.  He then promoted the Echuca
Irrigation and Freehold Land Company Ltd to complete purchase of the
land for irrigation with subdivision of the three properties into
blocks varying in size from 5 to 25\,ac.\fn{Helen Coulson,
\textsl{Echuca--Moama on the Murray}, 1995, pp.\,209--210.}  Shackell's
 rescue operation failed and in 1892 the land reverted to the previous
owners and the Millewa trust ceased operations without ever having
undertaken irrigation.

The Millewa trust was one of a few Victorian irrigation trusts formed
not by a group of landholders but with only one owner---a syndicate
or private company.  Those trusts were known as private irrigation
trusts and were later considered to be promoted for speculative
purposes.

\section*{Wimmera River Valley}

\subsection*{Young Brothers Irrigation Colony, Vic.}

The first irrigation colony in the Wimmera district was at Horsham,
where the mean annual rainfall is 17.5\,in and summers are dry and
hot.  Irrigation was promoted mainly by Thomas and George Young, stock
and station agents, who were involved with irrigation at two places
near Horsham about 1890, firstly at Dooen, five miles NE of Horsham,
and later within two miles of Horsham.\fn{S.~Murray,
\textsl{Irrigation in Victoria}, 1892.}  Their enterprise at Dooen has
been referred to as an irrigation colony although in 1892 Stuart
Murray reported only two holdings there---one for Young Bros and
another for Mr~Stephens.  The Young brothers were irrigating 10\,ac at
Dooen in 1885 with water drawn from a supply reservoir fed from the
Wimmera River.\fn{VicPP no.\,53 of 1885, RC~Water Supply, Further
Progress Rept MoE, p.\,124.}  The Young Brothers Irrigation Colony Ltd
was in existence on the north side of the Wimmera River in 1891 and in
1892 the colony involved 260\,ac all with irrigation channels.  At
that time 160\,ac had been sold and all but 60\,ac of the area had
been planted with fruit trees and vines.\fn{S.~Murray,
\textsl{Irrigation in Victoria,} 1892.}

\subsection*{Horsham Irrigation Colonising Company, Burnlea, Vic.}

The Horsham Irrigation Colonising Company began the Burnlea colony in
1890 on the south side of the Wimmera River at about one mile from
Horsham.  The company was formed by Thomas Young, James Brake,
Frederick Hagelthorn, and two engineers John D.~Derry and Percy
Learmonth.\fn{L.\,J.~Blake, \textsl{Wimmera}, 1973, p.\,35.}  By 1892
its extent was 550\,ac, all with access to irrigation channels, and
about 100\,ac had been sold with 50\,ac planted to fruit
trees.\fn{S.~Murray, \textsl{Irrigation in Victoria}, 1892.}

\subsection*{American Colonisation Company, Riverside, Vic.}

In 1892 the American Colonisation Company promoted Riverside, another
colony on the south side of the river, about two miles from Horsham.
Its 430\,ac were provided with irrigation channels, all allotments
were sold, and 150\,ac had been planted with vines and fruit trees
before the end of 1892.\fn{S.~Murray, \textsl{Irrigation in Victoria},
1892.}

\subsection*{Quantong Irrigation Colony, Vic.}

An irrigation colony west of Horsham near the Wimmera River was first
proposed in 1890 by Brake and Derry when they bought
2253\,ac.\fn{L.\,J.~Blake, \textsl{Wimmera}, 1973, p.\,35.}  In 1891
the colony was being promoted by the Cooperative Irrigation and
Mercantile Society of Australia Ltd. which advertised more than 80
horticultural allotments varying in size from 5 to 20\,ac and a large
number of township allotments.\fn{Horsham \& District Historical Soc.,
Memories of Quantong, 1991.}  The promoting company had Alexander
Baird as its secretary in Melbourne and many Quantong settlers had
dealings with this successful business man whose interests later
included mining, brewing, and cement.\fn{H.\,J.~Gibbney \& Ann
G.~Smith, 1987, \textsl{A Biographical Register 1788--1939}, vol.\,1
p.\,28.}  By about 1895 there were about 60 settlers in the
area.\fn{L.\,J.~Blake \& K.\,H.~Lovett, \textsl{Wimmera Shire
Centenary}, 1962, p.\,98.}  Although the scheme was promoted as an
irrigation colony, there was no supply of water until 1905.\fn{Horsham
\& District Historical Soc., Memories of Quantong 1991.}  The earliest
products of the colony were dried fruit, including raisins, currants,
and sultanas; fruit trees came into bearing before 1920.

\subsection*{Mount Arapiles, Vic.}

Near Mt Arapiles another colony was promoted in the early 90s; it was
reported in 1892 as involving 640\,ac, with 200\,ac sold in blocks of
10\,ac or more.\fn{S.~Murray, \textsl{Irrigation in Victoria}, 1892.}
It was expected to be irrigated by water from the Grampians supplied
by the channel system.

\subsection*{Haven, Vic.}

Haven was the name given to the last colony established near the
Wimmera River.  It was not begun until 1894 apparently as an outcome
of the village settlement south of Horsham associated with Rev.~Horace
Finn Tucker.

Some of these colonies in the Wimmera district were apparently
receiving irrigation in 1892.\fn{S.~Murray, 1892.}  By 1893 a few
hundred acres were recorded as receiving irrigation in the Western
Wimmera Irrigation Trust area.\fn{VicPP no.\,20 of 1896, RC~Water
Supply, Appendix~C.}  By 1907 the irrigated area in the district did
not exceed a thousand acres and mainly concerned vineyards and
orchards.\fn{VicPP no.\,38 of 1907, Annual Rept SRWSC, p.\,8.}
Quantong became the largest irrigation enterprise in the district.
Irrigation of these colonies generally depended on supplies from
storages dependent on runoff from the nearby Grampians mountains, with
gravity supply of water by streams and artificial channels developed
by the local trust responsible for water supply. John Derry, an
engineer with experience of irrigation in India, came to the Wimmera
in the early 80s, visited USA with Alfred Deakin for the Royal
Commission on Water Supply, and was closely involved with the Burnlea
and Quantong colonies.

\section*{Werribee River Valley}

\subsection*{Werribee Irrigation Colony, Vic.}

The plain traversed by the Werribee River on its way to Port Phillip
Bay remained for many years under the control of pastoralists,
especially the Chirnside family which in 1875 held 85\,000\,ac
freehold and grazed 80\,000 sheep.  Agriculture involved less than 5
per cent of the area although rainfall, on the average 20\,in in the
year, was sufficient to produce good crops of cereal hay and grass.
In 1880 less than 100\,ac were devoted to vegetables, orchards, and
gardens.\fn{Lynette J.~Peel, \textsl{Rural Industry in the Port
Phillip Region 1835--1880}, 1974, pp.\,162--163.}

The Werribee River, a relatively small stream by Victorian standards,
occupies a deep valley and changed seasonally from a torrent to a
series of pools until dams were constructed in its upper reaches.  Its
tidal reach was used for some years by paddle-steamers travelling five
miles from the Bay.

When public interest in irrigation was stimulated by Deakin's visit to
America, enactment of his irrigation legislation, and the arrival of
the Chaffey brothers to promote irrigation, the Werribee people were
not backward in responding: they held a public meeting in May 1886 to
register interest in local irrigation.\fn{Leader, 29 May 1886.}  The
provisions of legislation that year for the development of irrigation
by irrigation trusts supported by loans from the government led to the
formation of the Werribee Irrigation Trust in November 1888, a time of
low rainfall at Werribee where only 14\,ins were recorded that
year.\fn{VicPP no.\,20 of 1896, RC~Water Supply, Rept
pp.\,179--180.}  The trust concerned an area of about 1450\,ac
acquired from a local resident by the Werribee Irrigation and
Investment Co.\ which initiated formation of the trust.  This company
was launched in October 1888 and a few months later issued 100\,000
shares of \pounds1 each.\fn{Heather B.~Ronald, \textsl{Wool Past the
Winning Post}, 1978.}  George Chaffey became its chairman of directors
and E.\,C.~De Garis was the managing director.\fn{J.\,A.~Alexander,
\textsl{The Life of George Chaffey}, 1928, p.\,192.}  These men were also
respectively the chairman and secretary of the irrigation
trust.\fn{VicPP no.\,20 of 1896, RC~Water Supply, Evidence
pp.\,425--433.}

The company intended that the property would be subdivided into small
holdings provided with water stored on the river by a weir to be
erected a few miles upstream from the irrigation colony.  A temporary
pumping plant was being installed on the river to allow a considerable
portion of the land to be irrigated before completion of the
weir.\fn{Mildura Cultivator, 14 Feb.\ 1889.}  The site involved was on
the east side of the river, within a few miles of the Werribee
township.

Subdivision of the area went ahead, the pumping plant was installed on
the river, and an irrigation channel was made.  Boundaries of
allotments were planted with trees and advertisements enticing
settlers with the slogan `Fortunes in Vegetables' were made late in
1890 with advice that payment for allotments could be spread over 15
years.\fn{Australasian, 25 Oct.\ 1890, p.\,804.}

The irrigation company wished to install a pipeline in order to
irrigate more land; this depended on agreement with Percy Chirnside,
the owner of land to be crossed by the pipeline.  In order to
propitiate him, the Company proposed calling their irrigation colony
`Chirnside', but the stumbling block of compensation persisted and
delayed further action.\fn{Heather B. Ronald, 1978.}  Whether this
pipeline was to bring water from the proposed weir or for delivery of
supplies from the temporary pumping plant is not clear, but there is
no record of construction of the weir or installation of the pipeline.

Within two years of formation, some progress had been made with the
irrigation colony.  The Melbourne Nursery and Poultry Farm Company had
purchased 96\,ac of land for \pounds7500, the company balance sheet
showed a profit, and buildings were going up on the land.  One was the
expensive residence for George Chaffey, reputed to have cost
\pounds3000 and known as Manchester Park.\fn{Heather B. Ronald, 1978,
p.\,172.}  It was later let to Percy Chirnside while his mansion,
Manor Park, was being built just across the river.  Manchester Park
burnt to the ground in 1924.

In 1891 the Trust was responsible for irrigating no more than 200\,ac
and when the company went into liquidation that year, its
responsibility was assumed by George Chaffey who also failed to carry
on the undertakings and the land reverted to its previous owner,
Thomas Agar, who was elected by the remaining settlers as chairman of
the trust.\fn{VicPP no.\,20 of 1896, RC~Water Supply, Rept
pp.\,179--80, \& Evidence pp.\,425--433.}  De Garis, who had lived in
the district for a few years while active in the irrigation
development, moved to Mildura late in 1891, while George Chaffey and
his wife made the same change in 1892.  A few settlers continued with
irrigation of vegetables and fruit trees.

The Werribee trust was one of three private irrigation trusts which
had been assisted by the government with loans not repaid by 1896 when
the report by the royal commission found that:
\begin{quote}
	the promoters of these trusts had in each case conditionally
	purchased an area of lands which they desired to form into an
	irrigation trust, not for the purpose of working the land
	themselves, but with the object of cutting it up and selling
	it to others.\fn{VicPP no.\,20 of 1896, RC~Water Supply,
	Rept pp.\,176--80.}
\end{quote}
After this finding, the commissioners expressed the opinion that `the
State money had been advanced to irrigation trusts in a most lavish
and prodigal manner, and without careful investigation'.\fn{VicPP
no.\,20 of 1896, Rept p.\,185.} The commission also found that in
December 1889 George Chaffey had obtained an advance of \pounds3000
from the government without security and that the Minister, Alfred
Deakin, was at fault in making the loan.\fn{VicPP no.\,20 of 1896,
Rept p.\,190.}

Deakin's speech in 1896 in response to the report of the Commission,
which touched on so much of his responsibility for water supply in the
period 1886--90, was notable for its length and the fact that he was
obliged to acknowledge his personal responsibility for the loan to
George Chaffey.\fn{VicPD, 18 Dec.\ 1896 vol.\,84, p.\,4738.}

\section*{Nepean River Valley}

\subsection*{Mulgoa Irrigation Company, NSW}

Irrigation of fruit trees and vines on an area of more than
10\,000\,ac lying 30 miles west of Sydney, extending southwest from St
Marys to the Nepean River was promoted by George Chaffey and Henry
Gorman in the late 1880s.  At that time George Chaffey had experience
of developing irrigation settlements in areas with very low rainfall
at Mildura and Renmark, and at Werribee with moderate rainfall.  The
Mulgoa scheme was unusual because its area had an average rainfall of
27\,in.

The scheme was probably initiated in 1888, judging by a published
reference then to proposed irrigation near Penrith involving the
Chaffeys.\fn{Mildura Cultivator, 20 Dec.\ 1888.}  Promotion in 1891
apparently involved several men including E.\,C.~DeGaris in addition
to the Chaffey brothers.\fn{J.\,A.~Alexander, \textsl{The Life of
George Chaffey}, 1928.}  The Mulgoa Irrigation Bill came before the
New South Wales parliament in 1890 and was considered by a select
committee.\fn{NSW LC Journal vol.\,47, pt.\,2 1890, Rept Select Comm.\
on the Mulgoa Irrigation Bill.}  Several witnesses appeared before
that committee including the principal promoters, G.~Chaffey and Henry
Gorman, and H.\,G.~McKinney, chief engineer for water
conservation.  The Bill was passed late in 1890.

The Mulgoa scheme involved (i) purchase of 16\,000\,ac from several
more or less contiguous properties in the Penrith district and
division into allotments of three types: town, suburban villas
(2--5\,ac), and horticultural (10--20\,ac); (ii) supply of water for
irrigation by lifting water 130\,ft by pumping from the Nepean River
to a reservoir, reticulation by gravity via earthen channels, and a
subsidiary lift of a further 50\,ft to water the higher parts of the
area; and (iii) provision of weirs on the Nepean and/or its tributary
the Warragamba, to ensure adequate supplies.

Two men responsible for the engineering design were George Chaffey and
his associate J.\,G.~Starr.\fn{Sydney Morning Herald, 3 Jan.\ 1891.}
The scheme was publicised early in 1891 by articles in several Sydney
newspapers and the Mulgoa Irrigation Co Ltd was subsequently formed,
with A.\,W.~Stephen as managing director.  The company then invited
applications for purchases of the different types of holdings and
stated the arrangements for water supply, giving each settler `a
perpetual claim upon the company for water on the specified terms'
without the establishment of a water company.\fn{\textsl{Mulgoa
Irrigation Settlement}, brochure 1892.}

The company apparently made little progress with the irrigation
scheme, and the government was invited to take over the scheme in 1896
when legislation on water rights gave the opportunity for greater
state involvement in irrigation.  This proposition was considered by
Colonel Home, the irrigation engineer from India invited to report to
the government on irrigation prospects in the colony.  His report
showed that the Mulgoa scheme would be `far from remunerative'.\fn{NSW
V\&P 1897, vol.\,5, Rept on Prospects of Irrigation and Water
Conservation in New South Wales, by Colonel F.\,J.~Home.}  There was
no subsequent development of the Mulgoa irrigation scheme.

\section*{Hunter River Valley}

\subsection*{Segenhoe Estate, NSW}

Segenhoe was the name of an agricultural settlement which flourished
in the Hunter valley before 1830.  Prospective irrigation of the
Segenhoe estate, which involved 25\,000\,ac, was reported on by a
select committee of the New South Wales Legislative Assembly in 1891
when it considered the Segenhoe Estate Irrigation Bill then before
parliament.  William Harris told the committee that he was managing
director of the Land Company of Australasia Ltd, which owned the
property and proposed raising funds from abroad to impound at least
800 million gallons (3000\,ac\,ft) of flood waters of the Hunter River
system upstream from Aberdeen and Muswellbrook.  F.\.B.~Gipps was the
civil engineer responsible for the scheme which involved gravitation
of supplies to pastoralists acquiring portions of the property.  Other
witnesses included local pastoralists and townspeople from
Muswellbrook which might incur some disadvantage to water supply.

After the select committee reported to the legislative assembly the
proposed legislation apparently lapsed.\fn{NSW V\&P LA 1891--92
vol.\,7, pp.\,713--742, Rept Select Comm.\ on the Segenhoe Estate
Irrigation Bill.}

\section*{Darling River}

\subsection*{Menindie Irrigation Scheme, NSW}

An area of 25\,000\,ac extending northwards from Lake Menindie on the
Darling River was proposed for irrigation in 1892 by the Menindie
Irrigation Settlement Co Ltd with capital of \pounds50\,000.  The
scheme was considered by a select committee of New South Walews
parliament in 1893 when it was called on to report on the Menindie
Irrigation Bill.  Witnesses who gave evidence to the committee
included H.\,G.~McKinney, chief engineer for water conservation,
C.\,W.~Darley, engineer in chief for harbours and rivers, C.\,E.~Hogg,
engineer to the company involved, and J.\,M.~Purves, a land agent from
Sydney who represented the company.  This scheme was associated with
the projected Menindie and Broken Hill tramway, also the subject of a
report by a parliamentary select committee.  Neither of these projects
were realised.\fn{NSW V\&P LA 1892--93, vol.\,8, Rept Select Comm.\ on
the Menindie Irrigation Bill.}

\section*{Gawler River}

\subsection*{Gawler Plains Irrigation Colony, SA}

A scheme to provide irrigation on the Gawler plains north of Adelaide
was considered in 1889 by the Barossa Water Commission as one option
associated with construction of a reservoir on a tributary of the
Gawler River intended to augment supplies to the Adelaide metropolis.
Apparently inspired by the development of the Chaffey irrigation
colonies on the Murray River, the establishment of an irrigation
colony involving 12\,000\,ac near Smithfield was supported by several
prominent agriculturists but was viewed unfavourably by W.~Culcheth, a
Victorian irrigation engineer, and by the Commission.\fn{SAPP no.\,25
of 1889, Rept of the Barossa Water Commission.}

The scheme was revived later by two men: Packard, a surveyor, and
Lutz, an engineer.  In 1894 they were authorised by the South
Australian government to proceed with their plan for irrigation on the
Gawler plains using water from a reservoir to be constructed on the
South Para River.  Their project, referred to in an official report as
the Gawler Plains Irrigation Colony was expected to involve
subdivision of 10\,000\,ac between Smithfield and Salisbury into
blocks of 5 to 10\,ac for `intense irrigated culture of vineyards,
orchards, orangeries, etc', and into larger blocks for growth of
fodder for dairying and grazing purposes.\fn{SAPP no.\,111 of 1896,
The Proposed Gawler Plains Irrigation Scheme.}   Water was to be
provided from a storage reservoir on the South Para River, with an
embankment near Williamstown.

As with other promoters of irrigation colonies in Australia during the
1890s, Packard and Lutz failed to secure adequate financial backing
from their associates in England.  However, they prevailed on the
South Australian government to give limited financial help, by
guaranteeing a small amount of money, so that the work could proceed.
This help was authorized by the Gawler Plains Irrigation Act of 1896
but it failed to bring the project any nearer to realisation.
Eventually the Barossa Reservoir was started in 1898 by the government
to provide water supply to Gawler and settlements to the north.

\section*{Conclusion}

Many of the schemes were never tested in practice after failing to
attract sufficient support at the outset. This lack of support
indicates their difficulty in competing with many other speculative
ventures proposed during the land boom which affected several
Australian colonies. Except for the Tresco settlement which started
much later, the irrigation colonies which came into existence were
relatively small ventures in the Wimmera and Goulburn Valley of
Victoria.

%\section*{References}
%1. F.Bevilaqua, General Remarks And Detail Accounts Of The South Australian
%    Irrigation Company, 1884.
%2. SAPP No.158 of 1884 \& SAPP No.73 of 1885.
%3. Adelaide Observer 22/9/1888 \& 29/9/1888.
%4. SAPD 1888, P.1267, 9/10/1888.
%5. M.Cannon, The Land Boomers, 1986.
%6. A.J.Stimson, ADB Vol.9, p.655.
%7. Southern Argus, 5/5/1892.
%8. Southern Argus, 23/6/1892.
%9. Southern Argus, 20/10/1892.
%10. Southern Argus, 2/2/1893, \& J.Faull, Alexandrina's Shore, A
%      History Of The Milang district, 1981.
%11. SAPP No.29 of 1890, A.Deakin, Irrigation In Australia, 1892, p.92.
%12. SAPP No.29 of 1892, L.J.Blake, ADB vol.4,pp.58-59.
%13. S.Wells, Paddle Steamers to Cornucopia, 1986, p.77.
%14. G.Gordon papers, File H17329, La TL.
%15. Swan Hill Guardian 19/11/1890.
%16. G.Gordon papers, File H17329, La TL.
%17. N.Barr \& J.Cary, Greening A Brown Land, 1992, p.262.
%18. N.Barr \& J.Cary, 1992. p.328.
%19. F.M.Read, J.Agric.Vict. 1931 vol.29, p.551.
%20. F.M.Read, J.Agric.Vict. 1930, vol.28,p.65.
%21. F.M.Read, 1931, p.563.
%22. A.Trengrove, John Grey Gorton, 1969.
%23. VicPP No.20 \& 21 of 1896, R.C.Water Supply, Rept.  pp.176-180 \& 
%      MoE p.438.
%24. VicPP No 20 of 1896, Rept.  pp. 176-180 \& Appendix C.
%25. VicPP No.21 of 1896, MoE p.438
%26. W.H.Bossence, Murchison, 1965, pp.105-106.
%27. Aqua, Nov. 1968, p.53.
%28. Margaret Steven, ADB vol.12, 1990, p.445.
%29. C.S.Martin, Irrigation And Closer Settlement In The Shepparton
%    District 1836--1905, 1955, pp. 57-58.
%30. Australasian, 18/2/1888, p.354.
%31. Goulburn Valley Yeoman, 2/5/1890.
%32. S.Murray, Irrigation In Victoria, 1892, \&
%    Dept.Agric.Vict. Tech. Bull. No.3,1944.
%33. W.H.Bossence, Tatura And The Shire Of Rodney, 1969.
%34. M.Cannon, The Land Boomers, 1986, p.150.
%35. Australasian, 1/3/1890.
%36. S.M.Ingham, ADB, vol.5, 1974, p.258.
%37. Australasian, 8/11/1890, p.878.
%38. Australasian, 25/10/1890.
%39. VicPP No.21 of 1896, R.C.Water Supply, MoE, p.436.
%40. G.Gordon \& A.Black, Second report on irrigation, 1884.
%41. VicPP No.21 R.C.Water Supply, MoE p.436.
%42. Helen Coulson, Echuca -Moama On The Murray, 1995, pp.209-210.
%43. S.Murray, Irrigation In Victoria, 1892.
%44. VicPP No.53 of 1885, R.C.Water Supply, Further Progress Rept.
%      MoE, p.124.
%45. S.Murray, Irrigation In Victoria, 1892.
%46. L.J.Blake, Wimmera, 1973, p.35.
%47. S.Murray, Irrigation In Victoria, 1892.
%48. S.Murray, Irrigation In Victoria, 1892.
%49. L.J.Blake, Wimmera, 1973, p.35.
%50. Horsham \& District Historical Soc., Memories of Quantong, 1991.
%51. H.J.Gibbney \& Ann G.Smith, 1987, A Biographical Register
%      1788-1939, vol. 1 p.28.
%52. L.J.Blake \& K.H.Lovett, Wimmera Shire Centenary, 1962, p.98.
%53. Horsham \& District Historical Soc., Memories of Quantong 1991.
%54. S.Murray, Irrigation In Victoria, 1892.
%55. S.Murray, 1892.
%56. VicPP No.20 of 1896, R.C. Water Supply,Appendix C.
%57. VicPP No 38 of 1907, Annual Rept SRWSC,p.8.
%58. Lynette J.Peel, Rural Industry In The Port Phillip Region
%      1835-1880, 1974, pp. 162-163.
%59. Leader, 29/5/1886.
%60. VicPP No.20 of 1896, R.C.Water Supply, Rept.pp.179-180.
%61. Heather B.Ronald, Wool Past The Winning Post, 1978.
%62. J.A.Alexander, The Life Of George Chaffey, 1928, p.192.
%63. VicPP No.20 of 1896, R.C.Water Supply, Evidence pp. 425-433.
%64. Mildura Cultivator, 14/2/1889.
%65. Australasian, 25/10/1890, p.804.
%66. Heather B. Ronald, 1978.
%67. Heather B.Ronald, 1978, p.172.
%68. VicPP No.20 of 1896, R.C.Water Supply, Rept., pp.179-80, \& 
%      Evidence pp. 425-433.
%69. VicPP No.20 of 1896, R.C.Water Supply, Rept. pp.176-80.
%70. VicPP No. 20 of 1896, Rept. p.185.
%71. VicPP No 20 of 1896, Rept. p.190.
%72. VicPD, 18/12/1896 vol.84, p.4738.
%73. Mildura Cultivator, 20/12/1888.
%74. J.A.Alexander, The Life Of George Chaffey, 1928.
%75. NSW LC Journal Vol.47, Pt.2 1890,Rept Select Comm.on the Mulgoa
%      Irrigation Bill.
%76. Sydney Morning Herald, 3/1/1891.
%77. Mulgoa Irrigation Settlement, brochure 1892.
%78. NSW V\&P 1897, vol.5, Rept on Prospects of Irrigation and Water
%      Conservation in New South Wales, by Colonel F.J.Home.
%79. NSW V\&P LA 1891-92 vol. 7,pp.713-742, Rept. Select Comm.on the
%      Segenhoe Estate Irrigation Bill.
%80. NSW V\&P LA 1892-93, vol.8, Rept Select Comm. on the Menindie
%      Irrigation Bill.
%81. SAPP No.25 of 1889, Rept of the Barossa Water Commission.
%82. SAPP No.111 of 1896, The Proposed Gawler Plains Irrigation Scheme.

